We all agreed, as I've said from the outset, that the answer is not to defund the police. The answer is to fund the police with the resources and training they need to protect our communities, investing in crime prevention and accountable community police officers who will walk the beat, know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety in the neighborhoods. That's what it is. When you know who owns a local liquor store, know who the pastor of the church is, know—it makes a big difference when you know the community. And that's been my approach from day one.
Across the country, State and local leaders answered the call. And already, more than one—more than $10 billion of the American Rescue Plan funds have been committed to violence prevention and public safety across America. In fact, in—2021 was one of the strongest years on record when it comes to Federal support delivered directly to State and local governments to address and prevent crime.
And in Houston, Mayor Sylvester Turner, who I've spent some time with, and Troy Finner, the—who is the police chief, they're using ARP funds to improve medical health services—mental health services, excuse me—domestic violence and response efforts. Because they've realized that when there's a domestic violence problem, it's not always necessary to send a cop with a gun. You have to send someone who can talk people through things. And so—and funding a community reentry program and police overtime pay so an additional 125 officers can be present in areas where violent crime occurs most frequently.
Community violence intervention is about using tested messages, community leaders, community members to directly work with people who are the most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of those gun crimes. And it works. They intervene before it's too late, with public health and safety approaches that work.
As I said in the Cabinet Room, you know, the idea that when you get let out of prison after serving your time you get 25 bucks and a bus ticket, and you're going to end up under the same bridge you came from before. But you should be entitled, if you've served your time, to everything from Pell grants to food—to food stamps, the whole deal, to be able to take advantage of changing your life. And my administration is investing in those elements. The cities, the counties, and the States should be doing the same thing with the money they have because they are demonstrated ways to reduce crime.
But look, with regard to the leniency of prosecutors, that has, on balance, not been the biggest problem—the leniency of prosecutors. In the past, the hardest process—have been the intensity of prosecutors, people getting long sentences for crimes that are—anyway.
And so, and my—and bail reform—I think bail reform and the negative side of bail reform is vastly overrated. The idea that if you have no ability to make bail because you're poor, it should relate to the severity of the crime and what you—what the problem is related that you're accused of.
So the idea that somehow there's this overwhelming desire to protect a bad cop—it's the leadership's role to make sure they find them, get rid of them, and if they violate a crime, prosecute them.
Leader McCarthy talked about waiting—wanting a nation that's safe. Well, let's look at what Republicans have done to make it safe. They voted against virtually everything we've done to reduce crime and keep communities safe.
Look, folks, it's not just the—about the economy. Let's talk a little bit about crime and keeping communities safe. I signed the most significant gun safety law in nearly 30 years. I proposed over 100,000 new police officers.
Folks, Governor Hochul's opponent talks a good game on crime. But it's all talk. It's all talk. I chaired the Judiciary Committee for years. I'm the guy that introduced the money for police officers and reforms. But let's look at the fact.
And I love how these Republicans talk about fighting crime. On a Federal level, we passed the most significant gun safety legislation in nearly 30 years, and we're coming back to do what I was able to do in the nineties. That is ban assault weapons.
And another thing that we know is that voters spoke clearly about their concerns—about raising costs—the rising costs that they're—and the need to get inflation down. There are still a lot of people hurting that are very concerned. And it's about crime and public safety. And they sent a clear and unmistakable message that they want to preserve our democracy and protect the right to choose in this country.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then—since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the antifraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars—billions of dollars—from the American people.
Look, COVID left its scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know. But too often, that trust is violated.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
The President. ——wants to criminalize doctors and nurses who provide medical care for their patients; make it a crime. Republicans in Congress have proposed three national abortion bans just this last year. Well, make no mistake about it: If somehow Congress were to pass a national ban, I will veto it.
Audience member. [Inaudible]—is a war crime!
We'll never forget the rise of anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. And I'm proud to have signed the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support.
And because of his ridiculous, insane and very stupid policies, people are coming in and they're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen. We call it migrant crime. I call it Biden migrant crime. They're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen before. And you're reading it, like these three incredible young girls over the last few days.
Number three, the crimes that you are still charged with. And think of all the civil penalties you have. How many billions of dollars do you owe in civil penalties for molesting a woman in public, for doing a whole range of things, of having sex with a porn star on the night – and while your wife was pregnant?
Look, he lied about how great he was on crime. I had to remind him that he oversaw a record increase of murder rates in 2020. And, on my watch, violent crime has hit a 50-year low. There's more to do, but it's a 50-year low.
When I've thought about his 34 felony convictions, his sexual assault on a woman in a public place, his being fined $400 million for business fraud, I thought to myself, "Donald Trump isn't just a convicted felon. Donald Trump is a one-man crime wave." And he's got more trials—he's got more trials coming up.
Donald Trump isn't just a convicted criminal, he's a one-man crime wave.
And that's why I made Federal—lynching a Federal hate crime in Emmett Till's memory, and that's where you're being reminded—remember what they tried to do?—as well as establish national monuments for Mamie and Emmett Till and so much more—so there's no doubt about what's happening.
In America, they're safer today than when we were under Donald Trump. Trump continues to lie about crime in America, like everything else. Guess what? On his watch, the murder rate went up 30 percent, the biggest increase in history.
Meanwhile, we made the largest investment—Kamala and I—in public safety ever. Now the murder rate is falling faster than any time in history. Violent crime has dropped to the lowest level in more than 50 years, and crime will keep coming down when we put a prosecutor in the Oval Office instead of a convicted felon.
As federal prosecutor he took on terrorism and corruption and violent crime always with utmost professionalism and duty to the oath he swore.

Her previous tenure with the Justice Department saw her take on some of the most complex civil rights cases — from voting rights and redistricting challenges to prosecuting hate crimes and human trafficking.

What happens now is, if you in fact are, in going to—you arrest someone because they had—and you want to charge them, you can charge them with robbery or armed robbery. You charge them with armed robbery, you get a lot more time than if you don't charge with robbery. But if you want to make sure that someone who doesn't know much about their representation is able to, yes, you engage in prosecutorial misconduct by offering them to plead to, essentially—I mean, it's not the same—burglary, which gets them 2 years in probation and—so you don't even get a trial. You plead because you don't have adequate representation. You feel like everything is against you, and you're in trouble. When I did the sentencing act, that was designed to keep—make sure we had the same time for the same crime.
As chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I looked at all 10 Federal districts—and we took 6 months to do it—and found out if you're Black, and you—or your first-time offense of being accused of burglary—and maybe you committed it, and you were White and you did the same exact crime—in all 10 districts throughout the United States of America, a person—and don't hold me to the exact numbers, but the percentages are right—if you're a first-time White guy, you'd get 2 years; you'd get 7 years if you were Black.
So in order to make sure that you could not send people to jail for the same crime, I came up with this—this Sentencing Commission, which said that you—everybody who commits the crime has to receive between—instead of zero to 20 years, you drastically cut down the number of years you could go to jail. But say you have to—if you—if it's a one—first-time offense, you have to get sentenced between 1½ and 3 years. Okay?
They're tryin' to escape. And that's why they're coming. So what I did, I spent close to 100 hours with the leaders of those three countries and the U.N. making sure that we're -- for example, in one of the major cities down there, they said the crime rate's terrible. That's why people are leaving this particular city.
And I can think of nobody who is better qualified to do this than a former—this is a woman who ran the second largest attorney general's office in America—after the U.S.—after the United States Attorney General—in the State of California and has done a great deal upholding human rights, but also fighting organized crime in the process.
Well, what I was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but I was able to say: "Okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? I'll put the lighting in." We've got a contractor. We've got the type of lighting. We paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the Government. And violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. Fewer people sought to leave.
Much more need be done, but the first—first, I want to rein in the proliferation of so-called "ghost guns." These are guns that are homemade, built from a kit that include directions on how to finish the firearm. You can go buy the kit. They have no serial numbers, so when they show up at a crime scene, they can't be traced.
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
My first week in office, I signed a Presidential memorandum directing Federal agencies—all of them—to combat the resurgence of xenophobia. Not just one, every agency. Attorney General Garland, Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco, Associate Attorney General Gupta are all here today. The Department of Justice is strengthening its partnership with the community to prevent these crimes, in addition to its other work to take on violent extremism and domestic terrorism.
And with the new law—this new law, the Department of Justice and our entire administration is going to step up. Right now this is a critical problem of hate crimes being underreported.
It stems from two challenges. First, there's lack of resources and training for State and local law enforcement to accurately identify and report hate crimes to the FBI. Secondly, for more people in communities of color, there are language and cultural barriers in how to communicate what's happening to them. This law is going to make a difference. For example, the Department of Justice will issue clearer guidance for State, city, and Tribal, and law enforcement agencies on how to establish online reporting of hate crimes.
It will work with the Department of Health and Human Services to raise public awareness of COVID-19 hate crimes that occurred during the pandemic. There will also be a devoted official at the Department of Justice whose sole job is to expedite the review of hate crimes reports.
And thanks to two families here today, the law will help State and local governments ensure hate crime information is more accessible to the public: the family of Heather Heyer, a civil rights activist whose life was taken standing up to Nazis marching from the shadows of vengeance in Charlottesville; and the family of Khalid Jabara, a proud son of a family who immigrated from Lebanon in search of new beginnings, who was gunned down in front of their home here in America—in the United States of America—by a neighbor fueled by hate.
Because of you, the amendment named in honor of Khalid and Heather is now law to make sure that hate crimes are more accurately counted and reported and, hopefully, leading to a continued focus on ending these crimes.
It will provide resources to create specialized hate crimes units that will also help States create hotlines for hate crimes at State and local levels that will be accessible for people with limited English proficiency. And it provides resources for training for State and local law enforcement to identify, investigate, and report these heinous crimes.
Protecting our communities from violent crime is a top priority for the Department of Justice and one of our most important responsibilities. I'm glad the President brought us together today to discuss a subject of such importance to the public we serve. As our participants in today's roundtable have noted, the increase in violent crime in 2020 and early 2021 is deeply troubling.
That is why, last month, the Justice Department launched a comprehensive violent crime reduction strategy. This strategy is built around four principles: setting strategic enforcement priorities; fostering trust with and earning legitimacy in our communities; investing in community-based prevention and intervention programs; and measuring the results of these efforts through a decrease in violent crime, not merely by arrests and convictions, as if they were ends in themselves.
Now, we know that the lion's share of violent crime reduction work is shouldered by our State, local, Tribal, and Territorial law enforcement partners. Core to our strategy is targeted support of the critical work that you will be doing in the weeks and months ahead.
Every one of our U.S. attorney's offices is working with its local partners to establish an immediate plan to address the spike in violent crime that typically occurs during the summer. And the law enforcement components of the Department are making enhanced resources available to help prevent and disrupt violent crime and to focus on the most dangerous, most violent offenders.
The Department is also strengthening our Project Safe Neighborhoods, our cornerstone initiative that brings together law enforcement and community stakeholders to develop solutions to pressing violent crime problems.
We know that an effective violent crime reduction strategy must also address the illegal trafficking of firearms and focus on keeping guns out of the wrong hands. And so the Department is delivering on the promises we made here at the White House in April.
The Justice Department's violent crime reduction strategy and our initiatives to stem the rising tide of illegal guns will save lives. But these steps alone will not solve the problem of violent crime. Success depends on all of us joining together: those of you in this room, the many like you across the country who are working to keep their communities safe, and the people of our communities themselves.
The President. Thank you, General. Let me—before I begin, thank the participants in our roundtable today: two mayors—three mayors, chiefs of police, attorneys general, and community organizers who have been doing significant work in bringing down violent crime in their communities. There is no one answer that fits everything. And it's about being engaged and multiple organizations being engaged.
And we just met, as a I said, with a bipartisan group of mayors, law enforcement, and community leaders. And we discussed a comprehensive strategy that I'm releasing today to combat the epidemic of gun violence and other violent crime that we've been seeing in our country for far too long, that has spiked since the start of the pandemic over a year ago.
For folks at home, here's what you need to know: I've been at this a long time, and there are things we know that work that reduce gun violence and violent crime and things that we don't know about. But things we know about: Background checks for purchasing a firearm are important; a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines—no one needs to have a weapon that can fire over 30, 40, 50, even up to 100 rounds unless you think the deer are wearing Kevlar vests or something; community policing and programs that keep neighborhoods safe and keep folks out of trouble.
The last time we had data on this issue of who is purchasing guns was more than 20 years ago. Five percent of gun dealers—it turns out, in the study we did—showed that 90 percent of illegal guns were found at the crime scenes sold by 5 percent of gun dealers. Five percent sold 90 percent of the guns found at crime scenes.
In April, I announced that the Justice Department is going to be issuing an annual report on gun trafficking so we can update that data. Today the Department is announcing, as I just did, a major crackdown on—to stem the flow of guns used to commit violent crimes. It's zero tolerance for gun dealers who willfully violate key existing laws and regulations. Let me repeat: zero tolerance.
Police Chief Murray of the Baltimore—excuse me, Police Chief Merritt—Police Chief Murphy Paul of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, talked about how he's coordinating more closely with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, the ATF, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the FBI, to help take on criminal organizations committing violent crimes in the city. This kind of coordination is essential to keeping the weapons of war out of the hands of dangerous criminals, fugitives, and gangs, as well as organized crime.
Third, we discussed historic funding—the—we discussed historic funding for States, cities, and counties, and Tribes for law enforcement and crime prevention. You know, they've not only had to fight this pandemic, they've also had to deal with economic crisis that has decimated their budgets, forced them to cut essential services, including law enforcement and social services.
Much of this relief has already arrived. The rest is on its way. And we're now providing more guidance on how they can use the $350 billion nationally that the American Rescue Plan has available to help reduce crime and address the root causes. For example, cities experiencing an increase in gun violence were able to use the American Rescue Plan dollars to hire police officers needed for community policing and to pay their overtime.
Mayors will also be able to buy crime-fighting technologies, like gunshot detection systems, to better see and stop gun violence in their communities. They can use the funding to scale up wraparound services for the residents as well, including substance abuse and mental health services that we know will make a difference to prevention of crime.
We know summer job training—summer jobs, training, and recreation for young people work. They help make sure young people pick up a paycheck instead of a pistol. One study found a Boston summer jobs program for youth reduction reduced violent crimes by 35 percent in Boston. Another study found that a program that offers high school students in Chicago a good summer job and an adult mentor and behavioral therapy led to a 45-percent drop in violence.
And for folks at home, the American Rescue Plan, which is a once-in-a-generation investment to reduce violence in America, is available. I'm proud of it. It means more police officers, more nurses, more counselors, more social workers, more community violence interrupters to help resolve issues before they escalate into crimes.
Fourth, we discussed the need to support community violence intervention. These are local programs that utilize trusted messengers and community members and leaders to work directly with people who are most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of gun crimes.
States and cities should invest the American Rescue Plan funds in those kinds of anti-violent crime programs. And today I'm announcing that the White House will be working with 15 jurisdictions that are doing exactly that—from Baltimore to Baton Rouge, and Memphis to Minneapolis—to build up their community violence intervention programs, starting this summer.
And Mayor Steve Allender of Rapid City, South Dakota—a Republican and a former chief of police himself—joined us today and will be a part of this effort to help disrupt cycles of crime and violence in his community and nearby Tribal communities. We need more mayors to follow, and I'm going to be pushing to keep—pushing for more of these proven programs, which are part of the American Jobs Plan and my budget.
And we need to keep building on the gun violence and crime-prevention strategy we're laying out today. Folks, this shouldn't be a red or blue issue, it's an American issue. We're not changing the Constitution; we're enforcing it, being reasonable. We're taking on the bad actors doing bad and dangerous things to our communities and to our country.
But the purpose of the meeting today is, we've convened a group of law enforcement and other community leaders, including mayors of the—of our cities: one, to thank them for their service because we owe them big time; second, to hear directly from each of them about reducing violent crime and, particularly, gun violence in their communities.
While there's no one-size-fit-all approach, we know there are some things that work, and the first of those that work is stemming the flow of firearms used to commit violent crimes. And we've talked—you and I have talked about this, Mayor, before.
Third, our plan invests in community violence and intervention. We—what we want to do is, when we—we know we utilize trusted community members and encourage more community policing, we can intervene before the violence erupts, at least that's what, I think, consensus and our experience. And community violence intervention programs have shown to reduce crime in some cities by up to 60 percent.
Fourthly, our strategy to fund the other vital services, like mental health and substance abuse disorder programs, job training, and summer job programs. And this is going to help prevent crime and support young people to pick up a paycheck instead of a pistol.
We recognize that we have to come together to fulfill the first responsibility of a democracy, and that's keep each other safe. And that's what the American people are looking for when it comes to reducing violent crime and gun violence.
And finally, there's much more to be done and so much more to do—tackling voting rights, which is an existential threat to democracy right now. The things that are being asked are just beyond the pale. And the Vice President has been working hard on this issue and is going to continue to—we all are—but there's much more to do. We have to tackle the immigration problem, which we're working really hard to get done in a humane and serious way. Police reform and crime.
The President. Now, I'm not being a wise guy. There's no reason you should—have you seen my gun violence legislation I've introduced? As you know—because you're so involved—actually, crime is down; gun violence and murder rates are up. Guns. I'm the only guy that ever got passed legislation, when I was a Senator, that made sure we eliminated assault weapons. The idea you need a weapon that can have the ability to fire 20, 30, 40, 50, 120 shots from that weapon—whether it's a 9-millimeter pistol or whether it's a rifle—is ridiculous.
And when we did that, violent crime went down. All the criticism about the original crime bill—well, guess what? Crime went down until we stopped doing community policing. So it's about getting—we have availability now of over a billion—lots of money for cops to be able to hire psychologists, psychiatrists, as well as social workers to be engaged in the process.
Number three, when people are in fact in jail, they should be getting—if that's not the main crime, but they also did—they should be getting treatment while they are in jail.
Fourth, when people get out of jail—whether it's for drug addiction or any other crime—if they've served their time, they should have full access to everything from Pell grants, to public housing, to the like.
Today, I think, is a day of hope. And I mean that. A day of hope and healing for victims of crime and organizations that support those victims of crime.
When someone commits a crime, it's not enough to bring the predator to justice; we also need to support the victims. And it's something that, way back—150 years ago, when I was chairman of the Judiciary Committee, we spent a lot of time working on and setting up victims' funds. What—that's what this Crime Victims Fund does.
And you know, many times, the body language that you'd see when you walked in was one of the victims of crime finding themselves almost curled up, Dianne, in a ball. They were still suffering from a serious, serious, not only physical abuse they received, but quite frankly, the emotional abuse. And you can see the pain. You can see the pain was still with them, and you wondered when was this going to abate, no matter what we did.
And there are economic costs for survivors as well: medical costs, lost productivity from work, and navigating the court system. That's why victims compensation programs helps victims and their families cover the costs they'd suffered from the crime. They can—there can be counseling and medical bills, lost wages because you couldn't work, paying for temporary housing for a family fleeing abuse, even fixing a broken door kicked down by an abuser. And you know, the vast majority of children out in the street are the children who are, in fact, the children of abused women. It can also be a long-term support survivors need to heal, every time, in every single sense of the word.
When my son Beau was the attorney general of the State of Delaware, he took pride in getting more support more quickly to victims, especially to protect and care for child victims. And I know that, as the San Francisco DA and the California attorney general, Vice President Harris expanded support for victims of crime and launched one of the Nation's first medical centers focused on treating childhood trauma caused by violence in a home or in a community.
This bill is going to allow us to make sure that all the fines and penalties that are from Federal cases go into the victims—the Crime Victims Fund to rebuild this fund, because it's badly needed. This is going to enable us to provide more help and support to victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, child abuse, trafficking, and other crimes all across America.
Terry understands. He knows—he knows—also about crime prevention as a top priority. He understands how important it is to have funding—to find funding—from the American Rescue Plan to provide law enforcement personnel with more resources, not fewer resources.
And one of the things -- look, when we had community policing initially in the late '90s, violent crimes dropped significantly, significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police.
And what -- but the cops made sure they had -- she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she pick up the phone and call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so, crime began to drop.
And one of the things—look, when we had community policing, initially in the late nineties, violent crime dropped significantly—significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police. What I did: I eliminated the LEAA funding—Law Enforcement Assistance Act—and I put in place the proposal that required community policing.
And what—but the cops made sure they had—she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she'd pick up the phone on call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so crime began to drop.
Earlier this week, I released the first U.S. Government Strategy on Countering Corruption, which elevates our fight against transnational corruption, a crime that drains public resources and hollows out the ability of governments to deliver for the people and just evaporates confidence that the people much need to have in their government. The strategy includes working with other partners—all of you around the world—to improve transparency, hold corrupt actors accountable, reduce their ability to use the United States international financial system to hide assets and to launder money.
With my American Rescue Plan, which passed right after historic investment in community policing and violence intervention programs that are shown to reduce violence crime—violent crime as much as 60 percent. We don't have to spend less money, we have to spend more money on police to give them the kind of help they genuinely need. Why is a police officer showing up to a suicide threat, someone threatening to jump off a building? We need more social workers there. We need more psychologists there. They need help. They're basically good people, prevent violence in the first place.
That also means building more affordable housing so people can have safe places closer to their jobs. Funding proven programs to help fight violent crime. We shouldn't be cutting funding for police departments. I proposed increasing funding.
And I've noticed, in my experience—when I wrote the first crime bill, I noticed that, you know, I don't hear many communities—no matter what their color or their background—saying, "I don't want more protection in my community." I don't know, I haven't found one of those yet.
And so I've asked the Congress to provide $200 million to invest in community violence intervention programs as well—they work; they work—where community members with credibility work directly with people that are most likely to commit crimes or be victims of gun crimes. And they work.
You know, I know this is a priority for Senator Schumer, what you all are doing here. I—if I hear one more call from him that we need more money for housing and more money for cops—I don't know, I'm going to send him back to you all. [Laughter] But all kidding aside, this is a half a billion dollars of proven strategies, and we know it will reduce crime.
You know, you can count on me to be a partner in that effort. And I have the U.S. Attorney—United States Attorney General here with me today. And we put together a comprehensive strategy to combat gun crime in cities like New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and many other cities—San Francisco.
But there's more we can do. Across the country, police departments report sharp increases in the number of ghost guns found at crime scenes. That's why, today, the department is launching an intensified National Ghost Gun Enforcement Initiative to determine and deter criminals from using those weapons to cover their tracks. If you commit a crime to the ghost gun, not only are State and local prosecutors going to come after you, but expect Federal charges and Federal prosecution as well.
Today the Attorney General directed all U.S. attorneys in the United States to prioritize combating gun trafficking across State lines and city boundaries. The Justice Department is sending additional prosecutorial resources to help shut down what's referred to, as you all know, as the "Iron Pipeline" that funnels guns from shops in States like Georgia to crime scenes in Baltimore and Philadelphia and New York and so many other places.
You know, I want more cities and States to use some of the $350 billion we sent to them on the American Rescue Plan to fight crime, to keep our communities safe by hiring more police officers for community policing and paying police overtime and purchasing gun-fighting technologies, like technologies that hears, locates gunshots so there can be immediate response because you know exactly where it came from.
The third thing our plan calls for: investing in critical services that reduce crime and violence; community violence intervention programs, like the one I'm going to see after this meeting; summer school; afterschool programs for teens.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
Well, what you did matters. Helping unemployed parents get back to work by covering childcare costs, like Oakland County, Michigan, did. Reducing gun crime by retaining police officers, like DeKalb County did in Georgia. Expanding community violence intervention programs, like King County did in Washington. Ensuring people get the full benefit of one of the most consequential tax cuts for working families in our history.
Tonight I say to the Russian oligarchs and the corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime: No more. The United States—[applause]—I mean it. The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of the Russian oligarchs.
Like some of you that have been around for a while—I've worked with you on these issues for a long time. I know what works: Investigating [Investing in]* crime prevention and community policing: cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety.
Folks, as I've just demonstrated, while it often appears we do not agree—[laughter]—and that—we do agree on a lot more things than we acknowledge. I signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year, from preventing Government shutdowns, to protecting Asian Americans from still-too-common hate crimes, to reforming military justice. And we'll soon be strengthening the Violence Against Women Act that I first wrote three decades ago.
This budget invests in funding for agencies like the FBI and U.S. Marshals and the Drug Enforcement Agency, but it also includes funding for COPS programs to increase community policing and the ability of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms tackle—to tackle gun crime. And it funds entirely new community violence intervention programs just at the Department of Justice.
Community violence interruption programs are programs where trusted community members work directly with the people who are most likely to commit or become victims of gun crimes. I had a chance to meet with those leaders in one of the programs in New York City not long ago. And I saw the difference they were making every day. We know these programs can dramatically reduce violence, and we're going to fund a lot more of them.
This bill also includes grants for State and local law enforcement and crime prevention programs. We're talking about drug treatment programs, school violence prevention programs, programs where people who might end up in prison and instead get mandatory mental health care that they need. Part of the safety—before any crime was committed.
Look, thank you for coming together and never giving up. You know, the fact is that it really wasn't so long ago this country didn't want to talk about violence against women, let alone as being a national epidemic, something the government had to address. As a society, we literally looked away. We looked away. In many places, it wasn't a crime. And I don't recall—I don't recall how many times I was told in the prelude to writing the legislation that it's a "family affair." "You don't understand, Biden. It's a family affair."
And we also made landmark reforms in military justice to help end the epidemic of sexual violence and harassment in our armed forces, fundamentally changing how the military investigates, prosecutes sexual assault, domestic violence, and other related crimes. Thank you, Kirsten Gillibrand. Thank you, Jackie Speier. Is Jackie here? Stand up, please. Stand up. You did an incredible job. Thank you, thank you, thank you.
The budget puts more police on the street for community policing so they get to know the community they're policing; allows the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms and the FBI to hire the agents they need to help fight gun crime and other violent crimes in our communities; and funds body cameras and makes sure police work with our local communities and are accountable to these communities.
It funds crime prevention and community violence intervention, drug treatment, mental health, criminal justice reform, and reentry for people coming home after incarceration. All demonstrable ways to reduce crime—and proven ways.
There's a—and it all works. If you see these community intervention programs, they work. They actually reduce crime. They significantly reduce crime. So that's a big piece of it.
The President. I just signed into law the Emmett Till Antilynching Act, making lynching a Federal hate crime for the first time in American history. I want to thank Vice President Harris who was a key cosponsor of this bill when she was a United States Senator.
The President. In 1898, in order to make a case for the antilynching law. It was over 100 years ago, in 1900, when a North Carolina Representative named George Henry White—the son of a slave; the only Black lawmaker in Congress at the time—who first introduced legislation to make lynching a Federal crime. Hundreds—hundreds—of similar bills have failed to pass.
Over the years, several Federal hate crime laws were enacted, including one I signed last year to combat COVID-19 hate crimes. But no Federal law—no Federal law—expressly prohibited lynching. None. Until today.
Their crimes? Trying to vote. Trying to go to school. To try and own a business or preach the Gospel. False accusations of murder, arson, and robbery. Simply being Black. Often the crowds of White families gathered to celebrate the spectacle, taking pictures of the bodies and mailing them as postcards.
The President. No, I think it is a war crime.
The President. Well, no, no—go—go—the war crimes—yes, I'm going to continue to add sanctions.
Buyers aren't required to pass background checks. Because guns have no serial numbers—these guns—when they show up at a crime scene, they can't be traced. Harder to find and prove who used them. Meaning you can't connect the gun to the shooter and hold them accountable.
In fact, the ATF reports that they've been able to trace less than 1 percent—less than 1 percent—of ghost guns reported by law enforcement. And so it makes sense that police across the country are increasingly finding ghost guns at crime scenes. And by the way, ghost guns can be, quote, "rifles"—essentially assault weapons as well. This is one version of the kit you can buy.
All of a sudden, it's no longer a ghost; it has a return address. And it's going to help save lives, reduce crime, and get more criminals off the streets. And this rule is only part of our strategy to go after ghost guns.
If you commit a crime with a ghost gun, expect Federal prosecution, not just State. Expect Federal prosecution. This rule is an important step. It's going to make a difference, I promise you. And there are a lot of other things we know work to reduce gun violence and other violent crimes and save lives.
In addition today—in addition to today's rule, we're working on four areas. First, we're going after rogue gun dealers. The last time we had data on this was more than 20 years ago. Five percent of gun dealers sold 90 percent of illegal guns found at crime scenes. Five percent sold 90 percent.
The Justice Department is surging prosecutorial resources to help shut down these trafficking corridors, including the one known as the "Iron Pipeline" that funnels weapons from gun shops in States like Georgia to crime scenes up and down the East Coast.
Thirdly, we're funding strategies we know reduce gun crime: community policing and community violence interruption. Look, I've said it many times: The answer is not to defund the police. It's to fund the police and give them the tools and training to support—they need to be the partners and the protectors of our communities in need.
And I've already made clear that I want cities, States, counties, and Tribes to use some of the $350 billion we sent to them in the American Rescue Plan—that I wrote in the first month—to reduce gun violence, hire police officers for community policing, pay police overtime, purchase crime-fighting technologies. They were given the money. They can do it. Spend it.
And now, on top of that, I'm calling for additional funding to put police on the streets for community policing. One thing we learned in the middle of the crime wave not long ago: When the cop knows by first name who owns the corner drug store, who lives in the apartment above 6B, who the people who are—the pastors of the churches, guess what? People talk to them. They trust them.
My son was the attorney general in Delaware. He'd go around and make sure everybody, literally, in these high-crime-rate neighborhoods—he'd give them his personal cell phone number and instructed all of the cops to do the same thing. And they did. And the crime plummeted. Not a joke. Look at the record. Not just my son, but all across the Nation.
And for the AFT [ATF]* to hire agents they need to help the fight gun crime—more agents.
We're also investing in community violence intervention. These are areas, local programs that utilize trusted messengers—community members and leaders—to work directly with people who are the most likely to commit a gun crime or become victims of gun crime—get to them early. It works. It works. They intervene before it's too late.
These are all demonstrated ways to reduce crime. And I'm strongly urging cities, States, counties, and Tribes to use the Rescue Plan funding we've sent them to do more in each of these areas. And they need to do more and do it quickly, before the summer, when crime typically surges around America.
Steve also partnered with the community leaders and law enforcement to help prevent violent crime. He's worked with the police to combat domestic extremism and to take violent criminals off the street. Steve's record makes him ready on day one to lead this agency.
But here's the deal: The fact of the matter is, it's not just about choice that's at stake here. So much more is at stake—everything from contraception. There used to be a law on the books in Connecticut—Griswold v. Connecticut—that said a married couple could not—it was a crime to purchase contraceptives using the privacy of their own bedroom.
We all agreed, as I've said from the outset, that the answer is not to defund the police. The answer is to fund the police with the resources and training they need to protect our communities, investing in crime prevention and accountable community police officers who will walk the beat, know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety in the neighborhoods. That's what it is. When you know who owns a local liquor store, know who the pastor of the church is, know—it makes a big difference when you know the community. And that's been my approach from day one.
Across the country, State and local leaders answered the call. And already, more than one—more than $10 billion of the American Rescue Plan funds have been committed to violence prevention and public safety across America. In fact, in—2021 was one of the strongest years on record when it comes to Federal support delivered directly to State and local governments to address and prevent crime.
And in Houston, Mayor Sylvester Turner, who I've spent some time with, and Troy Finner, the—who is the police chief, they're using ARP funds to improve medical health services—mental health services, excuse me—domestic violence and response efforts. Because they've realized that when there's a domestic violence problem, it's not always necessary to send a cop with a gun. You have to send someone who can talk people through things. And so—and funding a community reentry program and police overtime pay so an additional 125 officers can be present in areas where violent crime occurs most frequently.
Community violence intervention is about using tested messages, community leaders, community members to directly work with people who are the most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of those gun crimes. And it works. They intervene before it's too late, with public health and safety approaches that work.
As I said in the Cabinet Room, you know, the idea that when you get let out of prison after serving your time you get 25 bucks and a bus ticket, and you're going to end up under the same bridge you came from before. But you should be entitled, if you've served your time, to everything from Pell grants to food—to food stamps, the whole deal, to be able to take advantage of changing your life. And my administration is investing in those elements. The cities, the counties, and the States should be doing the same thing with the money they have because they are demonstrated ways to reduce crime.
But look, with regard to the leniency of prosecutors, that has, on balance, not been the biggest problem—the leniency of prosecutors. In the past, the hardest process—have been the intensity of prosecutors, people getting long sentences for crimes that are—anyway.
And so, and my—and bail reform—I think bail reform and the negative side of bail reform is vastly overrated. The idea that if you have no ability to make bail because you're poor, it should relate to the severity of the crime and what you—what the problem is related that you're accused of.
So the idea that somehow there's this overwhelming desire to protect a bad cop—it's the leadership's role to make sure they find them, get rid of them, and if they violate a crime, prosecute them.
We should focus on and fund the things we know that work, like crime prevention and community policing. Not one cop in a car, but two walking the street. Cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, who can restore trust and safety.
And it's working. More than 300 communities, from big cities to small towns, are using more than $10 billion of American Rescue Plan funds for violence prevention and public safety this year: building new police training facilities; recruiting, which is getting harder; hiring; and giving policemen a raise; partnering with the Federal, State, and local community groups to reduce gun violence; investing in community interventions that use trusted community members to work directly with people who are most likely to commit gun crimes or become the victims of gun crimes and intervene before it's too late.
With my budget last year, we increased funding for State and local law enforcement by almost—well, not almost—29 percent. That included significant investment in Community Oriented Policing Services, the "COPS" program designed to build legitimacy and trust in communities, to address violent crime, to combat hate and extremism.
My budget for next year doubles the investment in community policing, three-hundred—$573 million [$537 million],* the most in over a decade. And on top of that, it includes $30 billion in new mandatory investments in law enforcement and crime prevention.
Look, I'm not naïve. I know tragedy will come again. It cannot be forever overcome. It cannot be fully understood either. But there are certain things we can do. We can keep assault weapons off our streets. We've done it before. I did it when we passed the crime bill last time. And violence went down, shootings went down.
The President. I believe anybody who echoes a replacement is to blame—not for this particular crime. But it's if for no purpose—no purpose—except for profit and/or political benefit. And it's wrong. It's just simply wrong.
And the President and I, and all of us as leaders, will not be silent. We will not stand by. We must always speak out against violence, against hate crime and discrimination, whenever and wherever it occurs. And we must do everything in our power to end this epidemic of hate.
But look, we know that for the generations of progress, racism, harassment, and hate crimes persist, as was pointed out by my friends behind me. And today we know that maybe you are one of them who don't feel safe walking American streets.
In a moment, our President will sign an Executive order that takes dozens of important actions to advance effective, accountable policing; to strengthen trust between law enforcement and the communities they serve; and to help us fight crime and promote public safety.
For the wheels of justice are propelled by the confidence that people have in their system of justice. Without that confidence, crimes would go unreported. Witness fears come—don't—fear to come forward; cases go unsolved; victims suffer in isolation while perpetrators remain free; and ironically, police are put in greater danger; justice goes undelivered.
By building trust, we can strengthen public safety, and we can more effectively fight crime in our communities. And we can do one more thing: We can show what's possible when we work together.
It's time they move. It's time to States and the localities spend the money they have to deal with crime, as well as retrain police officers, as well as provide for more community policing. It's time to get on with doing that. And that's what I think the message last night from the American public was in all the primaries.
The point of the matter is that we passed it for 10 years, this ban. And significant violent crime and particularly—went to—mass shootings went down 70 percent.
You know what it said? It said you could not—you could not—a married couple could not use contraceptives in the privacy of their own bedroom. And guess what's happening now? If they pass this law—if the Supreme Court rules as expected, we're going to be in a situation where it becomes a crime for a woman to order across a State line a pill that would curtail pregnancy, no matter what—no matter at what stage. A crime.
The President. I don't think there should—I don't think anyone in—anyone should be in prison for the use of marijuana. We're working on the crime bill.
But for too long, too many families haven't had that peace of mind. They watch the news and they see kids being gunned down in schools and on the streets. Almost every single night you turn the news on, that's what you see. They see their neighbors lose their loved ones to drugs like fentanyl, which is a flat killer. They see hate and anger and violence just walking the streets of America, and they just want to feel safe again. They want to feel a sense of security. And that's what my crime plan is all about.
Here in Pennsylvania, Governor Wolf is using $250 million of that money to reduce crime and violence across this State. And Mayor Brown just described how it's helping to fund community policing here in Wilkes-Barre.
And I mean it. Folks, when it comes to fighting crime, we know what works: officers on the street who know the neighborhood—not a joke—who know the neighborhood; who know the families they're protecting; who get the training they need to be able to do their jobs well; who work to earn the community's trust.
If I can just interject for a moment—my deceased son Beau, he was the attorney general of the State of Delaware. And what he used to do is go down, in the east side, the—called the "Bucket"—highest crime rate in the country. It's a place where I used to—I was the only White guy that worked as a lifeguard down in that area, on the east side.
And so I got her—so that—I got a phone number for the local cops. She'd call. They promised not to identify her, because they knew there'd be retribution. And the crime rate began to drop. For real. Not a joke.
You've got to know people. You've got to know and you've got to be able to trust the police. And the police had to be able to trust the community. But we slipped away from that. And we have a hell of a lot fewer cops today than we did when I wrote that initial crime bill. But now we've got to get back to it.
Without that, victims don't call for help, witnesses don't step forward, crimes go unsolved, justice isn't served.
Look, I'm prouder that, after 7 years, we finally have a Senate-confirmed Director of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, responsible for fighting gun crime. For 7 years, the other team would not let us appoint anyone to that job—incredibly important job—to help local law enforcement, Federal law enforcement, identify the ballistics, a whole range of things. For 7 years. We finally got it passed this time out, barely. Seven years, because didn't they didn't want anybody in that job. My plan gives the Bureau the funding to hire more agents, to stop gun trafficking.
Folks, look, we can help local law enforcement. We can solve more gun crimes if we have the—someone heading up, which we finally do, this organization that's designed to track this kind of behavior.
Finally, my plan invests in crime prevention programs that help keep young people from getting in trouble in the first place. Under my plan, communities can, one, provide after-school and summer job programs they get paid for. More access to mental health and drug counseling. More social workers and housing to keep people off the streets instead of when they get out of—when they get out of jail, they get 25 cent—dollars and a bus ticket, and they end up under the same bridge that they were under before. This will help prevent crime and get young people to pick up paychecks instead of a pistol.
All these steps will prevent crime, not increase it.
Leader McCarthy talked about waiting—wanting a nation that's safe. Well, let's look at what Republicans have done to make it safe. They voted against virtually everything we've done to reduce crime and keep communities safe.
It invests in community violence interventions to target those most at risk and save lives, which have shown—these community violence interventions have shown to reduce violent crime by up to 60 percent, where they're taken on in earnest.

And standing with many of you at the White House and the family of Emmett Till, I signed the Anti-Lynching Act in his name that, finally, after all these years, finally made lynching a Federal crime, a hate crime.

Look, folks, it's not just the—about the economy. Let's talk a little bit about crime and keeping communities safe. I signed the most significant gun safety law in nearly 30 years. I proposed over 100,000 new police officers.
Folks, Governor Hochul's opponent talks a good game on crime. But it's all talk. It's all talk. I chaired the Judiciary Committee for years. I'm the guy that introduced the money for police officers and reforms. But let's look at the fact.
And I love how these Republicans talk about fighting crime. On a Federal level, we passed the most significant gun safety legislation in nearly 30 years, and we're coming back to do what I was able to do in the nineties. That is ban assault weapons.
And another thing that we know is that voters spoke clearly about their concerns—about raising costs—the rising costs that they're—and the need to get inflation down. There are still a lot of people hurting that are very concerned. And it's about crime and public safety. And they sent a clear and unmistakable message that they want to preserve our democracy and protect the right to choose in this country.
On this day, I think of Mildred and Richard Loving, a young woman of color and a young White man. They met as family friends and eventually fell in love. In 1958, they drove to Washington, DC, to get married because their relationship was illegal in Virginia. They went back home. Five weeks later, police burst into their house and arrested them for the crime of being married. The crime of being married.
And in those towns where we are applying those actions—particularly the program we call Sembrando Vida, which means "sowing life," and Youth Building the Future Program—we've not just seen a reduction of people wanting to migrate to the United States seeking opportunities of better living conditions and jobs, but for many young people of those countries, crime has stopped being the only possibility of survival and the only way to move forward in life.
As I was telling you—I was telling Prime Minister Trudeau and President Biden—their teams, I was telling them as well: We only have two campaigns—publicity or propaganda campaigns—in the Government, in my administration. One is dedicated or devoted to not consuming drugs: "Say no to drugs." Because we have to also think of that. It became quite a famous thing—public fame. Everything related to gangs. They are even series of gangs and organized crime—gangs of organized crimes.
Meanwhile, we're making historic investments in community violence interventions. Studies have shown they reduce violent crime up to 60 percent. We've seen this kind of impact in Baltimore and Sacramento.
For example, with your help, I signed a law, a hundred years in the making, to finally making lynching a Federal hate crime—to silence, as your dad said, "the crying voice of little Emmett Till, screaming from the rushes of the Mississippi."
Many cities from Newark, New Jersey; to Baton Rouge, Louisiana—[laughter]—but all kidding aside—have made major investments in community violence intervention initiatives. These studies have shown, in some cases, they can reduce violent crime up to 60 percent, particularly among our youth. It doesn't always do that much, but it can do that—that much.
But as you mayors know better than most, when you see these problems of crime and the opioid epidemic, you know that a big part of that is mental health—mental health. And I want to take a moment to talk to you about how we're addressing that as well.
Yet, for all the progress, this community has experienced profound hate, pain, and violence and loss with the rise of anti-hate crime—Asian anti-hate [anti-Asian hate; White House correction] crimes. You know, gut-wrenching attacks on elderly immigrant women.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then—since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the antifraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars—billions of dollars—from the American people.
Look, COVID left its scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know. But too often, that trust is violated.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
But all kidding aside, you know, I served in the Senate for a long, long time and Vice President for 8 years. But, Governors, you've got to get it done. You've got to fix the potholes. You've got to take care of the crime in your street. You've got to do everything.
You know, it was almost exactly one year ago that I signed a law more than a hundred years in the making. [Applause] It was an honor. It was one of the great honors of my career. The Emmett Till Antilynching Act, making lynching a Federal hate crime.
Their crimes? Trying to vote. Trying to go to school. Trying to own a business. Trying to preach the gospel. False accusations of murder, arson, robbery. Lynched for simply being Black, nothing more. With White crowds, White families gathered to celebrate the spectacle, taking pictures of the bodies and mailing them as postcards. Hard to believe, but that's what was done. And some people still want to do that.
With your help, I signed a law more than a hundred years in the making to finally make lynching a Federal hate crime—the Emmett Till law. It's amazing. A hundred years. And I—it's astounding.
And so, folks, look, MAGA Republicans are calling for defunding the police departments and defunding the FBI now. That's a good one. I like that one. [Laughter] Well, guess what? And they refuse to provide funding that is going to keep communities safe and secure. We talk about—about crime.
When we did that in the Biden crime bill, crime—just plummeted, because they know folks.
And guess what? Violent crime dropped because she could pick up the phone and call and say: "They're outside. I can hear them. They're talking about this is what they're going to do." Cops need help.
From coming-of-age, to crime, to science fiction, to even zombies, he's one of America's great storytellers, bringing fresh perspective to the legacy of the original sin of slavery, elevating our Nation's consciousness around truth and justice.
Bryan Stevenson, a cherished son of my home State of Delaware and one of the most important civil rights leaders. You know, exonerating the wrongfully convicted. Funding [Founding; White House correction] the Legacy Museum and the National Memorial for Peace and Justice so the history of lynching and racial violence in America gets the reckoning it deserves. And providing a compelling foundation for me to be able to sign into law the Emmett Till's—name—to make lynching a Federal crime.
Tonight our message is this: Journalism is not a crime. Evan and Austin should be released immediately, along with every other American held hostage or wrongfully detained abroad.
For the first time ever, we explicitly made gun trafficking a Federal crime. They say: "What the hell? It wasn't already?" [Laughter] No, I'm serious. Think about it.
You go home and tell your mother, father, brother, sister, aunt, and uncle that, "Whoa, gun trafficking is now a crime." They're going to look at you like: "What are you talking about? It's always been a crime." It wasn't a crime.
We did the same thing for straw purchases. That's when a middleman, who can pass the background check, buys a gun usually for someone who can't pass the background check. It's now a Federal crime if you do that.
It's being challenged in court, but so far, it matters. That allow anyone to assemble a gun at home, bought from several different places, in as little as 30 minutes. Come on. These weapons don't have serial numbers. That's why they like to buy them, so criminals can use them to commit crimes and not leave behind a registration of who owned the weapon.
And the budget I submitted to Congress would help reduce crime by increasing funding to go after gun traffickers. And for the—by the way—you know what I get when I—we're talking about the fentanyl at the border and all that? I speak with the President of Mexico. "Will you stop sending guns to us?" We are sending dangerous weapons, particularly assault weapons, to Mexico. To Mexico. They're asking us: "Please stop it. Cut it off at the border."
Look, ladies and gentlemen, for those who say they're concerned about crime, you can't deal with crime without dealing with gun violence. It's a simple proposition.
The President. ——wants to criminalize doctors and nurses who provide medical care for their patients; make it a crime. Republicans in Congress have proposed three national abortion bans just this last year. Well, make no mistake about it: If somehow Congress were to pass a national ban, I will veto it.
When I served in the United States Senate, I was so profoundly honored to sponsor the Emmett Till Antilynching Act alongside Congressman Bobby Rush. And it was an even greater honor to stand beside our President, Joe Biden, as he signed the law that finally made lynching a Federal crime. So many leaders here today made that progress possible.
But today, on what we've been—would have been Emmett's 82d birthday, we add another chapter to the story of remembrance and healing. Just as we joined together when I signed the law in his name to make lynching a Federal crime—and think how long that took for that to happen—I mean—and we screened the movie "Till" at the White House—today we join together as I sign a proclamation designating Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument in both Illinois and in Mississippi.
While we gather the facts and law enforcement has opened a Federal civil rights investigation to treat this as a terror as—this terror as a possible hate crime, the act of domestic violent extremism it clearly is.
That's why I issued the country's first-ever National Strategy on Countering Domestic Terrorism, and I signed landmark hate crime legislation that we—that we've passed.
And because she found purpose through her pain, I was able to sign the law, believe it or not, for the first time in American history—think of this—for the first time making lynching a Federal hate crime in Emmett Till's name. It took that long—a hundred years. One hundred years.
But today I also want to thank you for deepening our security cooperation. That's one of my objectives today and, I hope, yours—including dealing with organized crime. And as we discussed, our work through the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity to help grow our economies from the bottom up and the middle out, not just the top down.
Let me close with this. In the last 2 years, we've shared some powerful moments together. I stood with the CBC and Bennie and Danny and the family of Emmett and Mamie Till at the lynching—they—it allowed us for the first—think about this. We've been fighting to make lynching a Federal hate crime, and I finally got to sign an Executive order doing that. Established a national monument so we'd always remember them and they couldn't rewrite history.
While Israel seeks to minimize civilian casualties, Hamas seeks to maximize civilian casualties. Hamas wants to kill as many Israelis as possible and has no regard whatsoever to Palestinian lives. Every day, they perpetrate a double war crime: targeting our civilians while hiding behind their civilians, embedding themselves in the civilian population, and using them as human shields.
We've seen the cost of this terrible double war crime against humanity that Hamas is perpetrating in the last 11 days. As Israel legitimately targets terrorists, civilians are unfortunately harmed. Hamas is responsible and should be held accountable for all civilian casualties.
We saw the cost of this terrible war crime yesterday, when a rocket fired by a Palestinian terrorist misfired and landed on a Palestinian hospital. The entire world was rightfully outraged. But this outrage should be directed not at Israel, but at the terrorists.
Here's the situation: You have a circumstance where the first war crime is being committed by Hamas by having their headquarters, their military hidden under a hospital. And that's a fact. That's what's happened.
We see it in our security cooperation. We're working side by side to combat arms trafficking, to combat—tackle organized crime, and to address the opioid epidemic and—including fentanyl, which, when we talk privately, I want to tell you about my great conversation with Xi Jinping on that issue.

Look, folks, we know pride also means feeling safe in your neighborhoods. The fact that we've made enormous progress preventing and reducing crime through the American Rescue Plan. We've made one of the biggest investments in local public safety ever: over $15 billion. And much of it has gone directly to you to hire for your departments.
You've done a tremendous job. You really have. You've done a tremendous job putting these resources to work. You know how to do it. And I'm not being solicitous. Mayors are the people who get things done: hiring more officers for accountable community policing, investing in violence intervention programs proven to reduce crime.
Across the country, violent crime is at—rates are falling. In some cities, it's going up, but overall—but not everywhere—overall, we are—we—they're falling, these rates—down nearly in every major category. Record declines in homicide. It matters.
And I think we'd all just love to hear—obviously, we're gratified, as you alluded to, that crime rates have fallen across the country this past year. But I think we'd all love to hear: What are your thoughts and plans moving forward for how the Federal Government can partner with cities to continue that momentum and to help us keep our communities safe?
The President. Well, thank you, Mr. Mayor. Look, I spent a significant portion of my career as chairman of the Judiciary Committee, which did almost all the crime legislation that exists. And in the last administration—in 2020, for example, we had the largest increase in murders we've ever had in all of America. Not blaming it on the—that President, particularly.
And so, when I got elected, I acted to turn it around. And so have you. In 2023, violent crime came down significantly. It's one of the largest yearly declines of homicide ever.
Audience member. [Inaudible]—is a war crime!
The American Rescue Plan also made one of the biggest investments ever in local public safety. All of you have done a tremendous job putting these resources to work: hiring more officers for accountable, effective community policing; supporting violence intervention programs that help prevent crime in the first place—and they work.
Folks don't always hear about it, but the fact is, we're making tremendous progress. Violent crime rates are falling all across the Nation, down nearly in every major category. Record declines in homicides.
And thanks to the law enforcement and community leaders here today who have helped bring down violent crime rates in their cities to historic lows.
Last year, the United States had one of the lowest rates of all violent crime—of all violent crimes in more than 50 years. Murder, rape, aggravated assault, robbery all dropped sharply, along with burglary, property crime, and theft. And it matters.
As President, public safety and crime reduction is a top priority for my administration and for me. And it has been for a long time, back when I was chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
As was referenced, during the pandemic, States and cities saw violent crime rising, and their budgets were strained as they faced deep cuts in law enforcement and public safety. But we stepped up.
We invested $15 billion—$15 billion—to make their communities safer, and we added billions more in grants to help. The Justice Department invested in law enforcement and community violence-interruption programs. Because of the American Rescue Plan, we have the largest Federal investment of fighting crime and preventing violent crime in any time in our history. And that's a big deal.
You know, we're—we know being in law enforcement is harder than ever. But—and we expect you to be everything to everybody. That's why we've invested in more crisis responders who work alongside police officers—as Chief said, mental health and social workers—to respond to nonviolent crimes as well.
The chiefs in this room know that when their communities trust the police, we can solve a hell of a lot more crimes a hell of a lot faster. That's why I signed the historic Executive order to advance executive [effective; White House correction] and accountable community policing, and it's very effective so far. You know, and I'm going to continue to call on Congress to pass the George Floyd Policing and Justice—the Justice in Policing Act so we can make police reform the law of the land.
We've also made historic investments in proven strategies to interrupt and prevent crime and violence in the first place. These programs use trusted messengers, including people who are in the neighborhood, people who have been incarcerated and are released now, people who have been through it, people who know what they're talking about.
And we have a track record of reducing violent crime, as a consequence of that, by 30 to 60 percent where those programs exist.
We need to support Africa's development on an equal basis and put an end to illegal migration while fighting human trafficking. Human trafficking has become the most financially rewarding crime globally, and we cannot accept it no—any longer. For this reason, I came here today also with a proposal to launch a global alliance against human traffickers.
Remember the spikes in crime and the murder rate? A raging virus that took more than 1 million American lives of loved ones, millions left behind. A mental health crisis of isolation and loneliness.
Last year, the murder rate saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime fell to one of its lowest levels in more than 50 years.
Give communities the tools to crack down on gun crime, retail crime, and carjacking. Keep building trust, as I've been doing, by taking executive action on police reform and calling for it to be the law of the land.
Take on crimes of domestic violence. I'm ramping up the Federal enforcement of the Violence Against Women Act that I proudly wrote when I was a Senator so we can finally—finally end the scourge against women in America.
Last year, murder rates saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime led—fell to one of the lowest levels more than—in more than 50 years. I'm ramping up Federal enforcement to violence—for the Violence Against Women Act, which I proudly wrote, so we can finally end the scourge of violence against women.
Folks, at the same time, Americans deserve the freedom to be safe from crime. And America is safer today than when I took office. Starting with the American Rescue Plan, I made the biggest investment in public safety effort. And you used it well.
You, all of you, have done a tremendous job in your communities putting those resources to work, using Federal money to hire more officers for effective, accountable community policing; expanding violence intervention programs that help prevent crime.
Folks, you don't always hear about it, but today's violent crime rates are down nationwide in nearly every major category, to one of the lowest levels in over 50 years. But there's more to do, but we're making American progress—serious progress.
Look, to communities everywhere and at this Boys and Girls Club—and, by the way, I've been a gigantic supporter of Boys and—it's the biggest in the country. But when I was a Senator, I provided a lot of money where—during the crime sprees were going on—for Boys and Girls Clubs. What you do is you build confidence, you build spirit, you build a sense of belonging. And it really matters.
Journalism is clearly not a crime. Not here, not there, not anywhere in the world. And Putin should release Evan and Alsu immediately.
While crime rates are down nationally, we've invested a record amount in public safety, violence interruption. We've also done much work to make communities safer. But to protect our officers, we have to get them the resources they need to be able to do their job and to keep the weapons of war out of the hands of people without—[inaudible].

We'll never forget him lying about the pandemic. We'll never forget the rise of anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. I'm proud to have had to—I'm not proud to have had to, but I'm proud to have signed and—the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support.
We've also provided historic value in funding for public safety and local communities, and it's bringing us results. We're seeing a 50-year low in violent crime in America. San Francisco, for example, anti-Asian hate crimes are down 75 percent over the last 2 years.
We'll never forget the rise in anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. And I was proud to have signed the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support to help States, cities better report, respond, prevent crime.
We also provided historic levels of funding to public safety in local communities that is delivering results. We're seeing near—a near 50-year low in violent crime in America. According to the Justice Department, hate crimes targeting Asian Americans fell by 33 percent from 2021 to 2022.
My Safer America Plan invests $37 billion in public safety to hire more police officers trained in community policing, to build trust, to solve crimes faster.
My Safer America Plan also makes investments to support programs that are proven to tackle the root causes of crime, to ensure you have the psychologists and the social workers responding to crises alongside you.
It's no accident that violent crime is near a record 50-year low—a 50-year low. It's because of extraordinary efforts by all of you in your communities, together with historic steps taken to support you—to stop the flow of illegal guns, to hold gun traffickers accountable for crimes.
Last year, we also saw one of the lowest rates of all violent crime in nearly 50 years. Murder, rape, aggravated assault, robbery all dropped sharply, along with burglary and property crime. Because this matters.
Through the American Rescue Plan, I was able to invest $15 billion, the largest investment ever to reduce crime. And we've built on that progress, with your help, the Bipartisan—[applause]—through the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act.
We've already funded nearly 80 programs and counting. We also made gun trafficking and straw purchasing a Federal crime for the first time, giving prosecutors the legal tools to charge traffickers and hold them accountable for the more severe penalties that are available.
And by the way, it's time we establish universal background checks—and by the way—and require the safe storage of firearms. We should hold families responsible if they don't provide those locks on those guns. We—if in fact—because three of these major crime scenes I've visited were ones where the mother or father left open—left the stuff out on the desk, left it out on a table, and the kid came and used it.
It's time we increase funding for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms and Explosives and other law enforcement agencies as well to solve the crimes faster.
Look, unfortunately—this is the only partisan thing I'm going to say—the congressional Republicans oppose all of these—every one of these. Instead of trying to stop our ban on ghost gun kits that contain these—can be—that can—commit crimes, they're working like hell to stop it. They want to—they want to abolish the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms and Explosives, which is responsible for fighting gun crimes.
And because of his ridiculous, insane and very stupid policies, people are coming in and they're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen. We call it migrant crime. I call it Biden migrant crime. They're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen before. And you're reading it, like these three incredible young girls over the last few days.
Number three, the crimes that you are still charged with. And think of all the civil penalties you have. How many billions of dollars do you owe in civil penalties for molesting a woman in public, for doing a whole range of things, of having sex with a porn star on the night – and while your wife was pregnant?
Look, he lied about how great he was on crime. I had to remind him that he oversaw a record increase of murder rates in 2020. And, on my watch, violent crime has hit a 50-year low. There's more to do, but it's a 50-year low.
When I've thought about his 34 felony convictions, his sexual assault on a woman in a public place, his being fined $400 million for business fraud, I thought to myself, "Donald Trump isn't just a convicted felon. Donald Trump is a one-man crime wave." And he's got more trials—he's got more trials coming up.
We ended Trump's ban on transgender Americans serving in the military, which has also been mentioned. And just last week, I was proud to correct a historical injustice by pardoning veterans who were court-martialed and dishonorably discharged for the crime of simply being themselves.

Donald Trump isn't just a convicted criminal, he's a one-man crime wave.
And that's why I made Federal—lynching a Federal hate crime in Emmett Till's memory, and that's where you're being reminded—remember what they tried to do?—as well as establish national monuments for Mamie and Emmett Till and so much more—so there's no doubt about what's happening.
You know, the most significant climate law ever—ever—in the history of the world. The first major gun safety law in 30 years. And today, violent—the violent crime rate is at a 50-year low.
What happens now is, if you in fact are, in going to—you arrest someone because they had—and you want to charge them, you can charge them with robbery or armed robbery. You charge them with armed robbery, you get a lot more time than if you don't charge with robbery. But if you want to make sure that someone who doesn't know much about their representation is able to, yes, you engage in prosecutorial misconduct by offering them to plead to, essentially—I mean, it's not the same—burglary, which gets them 2 years in probation and—so you don't even get a trial. You plead because you don't have adequate representation. You feel like everything is against you, and you're in trouble. When I did the sentencing act, that was designed to keep—make sure we had the same time for the same crime.
As chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I looked at all 10 Federal districts—and we took 6 months to do it—and found out if you're Black, and you—or your first-time offense of being accused of burglary—and maybe you committed it, and you were White and you did the same exact crime—in all 10 districts throughout the United States of America, a person—and don't hold me to the exact numbers, but the percentages are right—if you're a first-time White guy, you'd get 2 years; you'd get 7 years if you were Black.
So in order to make sure that you could not send people to jail for the same crime, I came up with this—this Sentencing Commission, which said that you—everybody who commits the crime has to receive between—instead of zero to 20 years, you drastically cut down the number of years you could go to jail. But say you have to—if you—if it's a one—first-time offense, you have to get sentenced between 1½ and 3 years. Okay?
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
As a young lawyer, Tom Dodd had already built a record of fighting hatred by prosecuting the KKK in the South, but—when, in 1945, he left behind his beloved Grace and his five young children—a young Christopher just 14 months old at the time—to travel to the bombed-out cities of Europe to document the shocking atrocities, still fresh in their horror; to question and cross-examine some of history's most notorious villains—and that's not hyperbole; some of history's most notorious villains—and to expose beyond question the depravity and the crimes against humanity that the Nazi regime committed.
Tom Dodd dedicated his intellect and his moral passion and his resolute sense of right and wrong to making the Nuremberg war crimes tribunal a testament to justice. And that's what it was: a testament to justice. Nothing like it ever happened before.
In my view, that was the lesson at the heart of the Nuremberg trials: finding truth, documenting it so it could never be denied. In court, Tom Dodd built the case fact-by-fact, using the Nazis' own meticulous records of crimes and shocking human evidence to pin down Nazi leaders who tried to deny their complicity and feign ignorance.
Nuremberg forced us to look closely at the evil of humankind and what we're capable of perpetrating, to see mass atrocities, crimes against humanity do not happen by accident. They don't happen by accident. They result of choices, choices made by individual human beings and world leaders.
And one of the things -- look, when we had community policing initially in the late '90s, violent crimes dropped significantly, significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police.
And what -- but the cops made sure they had -- she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she pick up the phone and call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so, crime began to drop.
And one of the things—look, when we had community policing, initially in the late nineties, violent crime dropped significantly—significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police. What I did: I eliminated the LEAA funding—Law Enforcement Assistance Act—and I put in place the proposal that required community policing.
And what—but the cops made sure they had—she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she'd pick up the phone on call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so crime began to drop.
Russia is the aggressor. No if, ands, or buts about it. Russia is the aggressor. And the world must and will hold Russia accountable. Russia's continued assault on—is yielding immense human costs. We've seen them leave behind horrifying evidence of their atrocities and war crimes in the areas they've tried to control. And as long as the assaults and atrocities continue, we're going to continue to supply military assistance.
We see on the news every single day the atrocities and the war crimes that are being committed by Russian forces in Ukraine, directed by Vladimir Putin. And it really is gut-wrenching. We see the incredible bravery of the Ukrainian fighters defending their country from—with everything they have. And by the way, it's not just their warriors. It's not just their military. It's people in the street—people in the street—staying behind. A lot have gotten out—5 million—but a lot are staying, including women as well as men, staying to fight for their country.
And we know that the United States is leading our allies and partners around the world to make sure the courageous Ukrainians who are fighting for the future of their nation have the weapons and the capacity and ammunition and equipment to defend themselves against Putin's brutal war. A lot of war crimes being committed.
We're seeing horrific atrocities and war crimes, children being buried in mass graves, millions of refugees fleeing Putin's war, and Greece and the United States standing as one to support the people of Ukraine and impose severe economic costs on Russia to hold Putin accountable.
But for too long, too many families haven't had that peace of mind. They watch the news and they see kids being gunned down in schools and on the streets. Almost every single night you turn the news on, that's what you see. They see their neighbors lose their loved ones to drugs like fentanyl, which is a flat killer. They see hate and anger and violence just walking the streets of America, and they just want to feel safe again. They want to feel a sense of security. And that's what my crime plan is all about.
Here in Pennsylvania, Governor Wolf is using $250 million of that money to reduce crime and violence across this State. And Mayor Brown just described how it's helping to fund community policing here in Wilkes-Barre.
And I mean it. Folks, when it comes to fighting crime, we know what works: officers on the street who know the neighborhood—not a joke—who know the neighborhood; who know the families they're protecting; who get the training they need to be able to do their jobs well; who work to earn the community's trust.
If I can just interject for a moment—my deceased son Beau, he was the attorney general of the State of Delaware. And what he used to do is go down, in the east side, the—called the "Bucket"—highest crime rate in the country. It's a place where I used to—I was the only White guy that worked as a lifeguard down in that area, on the east side.
And so I got her—so that—I got a phone number for the local cops. She'd call. They promised not to identify her, because they knew there'd be retribution. And the crime rate began to drop. For real. Not a joke.
You've got to know people. You've got to know and you've got to be able to trust the police. And the police had to be able to trust the community. But we slipped away from that. And we have a hell of a lot fewer cops today than we did when I wrote that initial crime bill. But now we've got to get back to it.
Without that, victims don't call for help, witnesses don't step forward, crimes go unsolved, justice isn't served.
Look, I'm prouder that, after 7 years, we finally have a Senate-confirmed Director of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, responsible for fighting gun crime. For 7 years, the other team would not let us appoint anyone to that job—incredibly important job—to help local law enforcement, Federal law enforcement, identify the ballistics, a whole range of things. For 7 years. We finally got it passed this time out, barely. Seven years, because didn't they didn't want anybody in that job. My plan gives the Bureau the funding to hire more agents, to stop gun trafficking.
Folks, look, we can help local law enforcement. We can solve more gun crimes if we have the—someone heading up, which we finally do, this organization that's designed to track this kind of behavior.
Finally, my plan invests in crime prevention programs that help keep young people from getting in trouble in the first place. Under my plan, communities can, one, provide after-school and summer job programs they get paid for. More access to mental health and drug counseling. More social workers and housing to keep people off the streets instead of when they get out of—when they get out of jail, they get 25 cent—dollars and a bus ticket, and they end up under the same bridge that they were under before. This will help prevent crime and get young people to pick up paychecks instead of a pistol.
All these steps will prevent crime, not increase it.
Folks, Governor Hochul's opponent talks a good game on crime. But it's all talk. It's all talk. I chaired the Judiciary Committee for years. I'm the guy that introduced the money for police officers and reforms. But let's look at the fact.
We clearly condemned this war immediately. We led all the diplomatic actions to condemn this war, the war crimes committed by Russia on the Ukrainian soil. And we support both the Ukrainian army that is resisting, the Ukrainian population resisting as well. And please allow me here to very much thank the United States of America for all the support it has provided, because this war is impacting the European soil even more directly, and you've chosen to invest so much to contribute to this joint effort.
President Macron. Regarding your question and the preconditions or the conditions set by the Ukrainian President, I believe that what is important for all of us to look at is that as Ukraine is resisting, suffering from war crimes, attacks on their civilian infrastructure, leading counteroffensive, President Zelenskyy presented a 10-point peace plan.
We're also working to hold Russia accountable, including efforts in Congress that will make it easier to seek justice for Russia's war crimes in Ukraine.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then—since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the antifraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars—billions of dollars—from the American people.
Look, COVID left its scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know. But too often, that trust is violated.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
It's astounding who stood up. Everybody. Everybody—women, young children—trying to do something. Just trying to do something. Pulling people out of apartments that are being shelled and, literally, what I think is a war crimes. It's astounding. And the whole world—the whole world—sees it and looks at it.
You know, this has been an extraordinary year in every sense. Extraordinary brutality from Russian forces and mercenaries. They've committed depravities, crimes against humanity, without shame or compunction.
We'll hold accountable those who are responsible for this war. And we'll seek justice for the war crimes and crimes against humanity continuing to be committed by the Russians.
As federal prosecutor he took on terrorism and corruption and violent crime always with utmost professionalism and duty to the oath he swore.

Her previous tenure with the Justice Department saw her take on some of the most complex civil rights cases — from voting rights and redistricting challenges to prosecuting hate crimes and human trafficking.

What happens now is, if you in fact are, in going to—you arrest someone because they had—and you want to charge them, you can charge them with robbery or armed robbery. You charge them with armed robbery, you get a lot more time than if you don't charge with robbery. But if you want to make sure that someone who doesn't know much about their representation is able to, yes, you engage in prosecutorial misconduct by offering them to plead to, essentially—I mean, it's not the same—burglary, which gets them 2 years in probation and—so you don't even get a trial. You plead because you don't have adequate representation. You feel like everything is against you, and you're in trouble. When I did the sentencing act, that was designed to keep—make sure we had the same time for the same crime.
As chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I looked at all 10 Federal districts—and we took 6 months to do it—and found out if you're Black, and you—or your first-time offense of being accused of burglary—and maybe you committed it, and you were White and you did the same exact crime—in all 10 districts throughout the United States of America, a person—and don't hold me to the exact numbers, but the percentages are right—if you're a first-time White guy, you'd get 2 years; you'd get 7 years if you were Black.
So in order to make sure that you could not send people to jail for the same crime, I came up with this—this Sentencing Commission, which said that you—everybody who commits the crime has to receive between—instead of zero to 20 years, you drastically cut down the number of years you could go to jail. But say you have to—if you—if it's a one—first-time offense, you have to get sentenced between 1½ and 3 years. Okay?
Well, what I was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but I was able to say: "Okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? I'll put the lighting in." We've got a contractor. We've got the type of lighting. We paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the Government. And violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. Fewer people sought to leave.
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
Protecting our communities from violent crime is a top priority for the Department of Justice and one of our most important responsibilities. I'm glad the President brought us together today to discuss a subject of such importance to the public we serve. As our participants in today's roundtable have noted, the increase in violent crime in 2020 and early 2021 is deeply troubling.
That is why, last month, the Justice Department launched a comprehensive violent crime reduction strategy. This strategy is built around four principles: setting strategic enforcement priorities; fostering trust with and earning legitimacy in our communities; investing in community-based prevention and intervention programs; and measuring the results of these efforts through a decrease in violent crime, not merely by arrests and convictions, as if they were ends in themselves.
Now, we know that the lion's share of violent crime reduction work is shouldered by our State, local, Tribal, and Territorial law enforcement partners. Core to our strategy is targeted support of the critical work that you will be doing in the weeks and months ahead.
Every one of our U.S. attorney's offices is working with its local partners to establish an immediate plan to address the spike in violent crime that typically occurs during the summer. And the law enforcement components of the Department are making enhanced resources available to help prevent and disrupt violent crime and to focus on the most dangerous, most violent offenders.
The Department is also strengthening our Project Safe Neighborhoods, our cornerstone initiative that brings together law enforcement and community stakeholders to develop solutions to pressing violent crime problems.
We know that an effective violent crime reduction strategy must also address the illegal trafficking of firearms and focus on keeping guns out of the wrong hands. And so the Department is delivering on the promises we made here at the White House in April.
The Justice Department's violent crime reduction strategy and our initiatives to stem the rising tide of illegal guns will save lives. But these steps alone will not solve the problem of violent crime. Success depends on all of us joining together: those of you in this room, the many like you across the country who are working to keep their communities safe, and the people of our communities themselves.
The President. Thank you, General. Let me—before I begin, thank the participants in our roundtable today: two mayors—three mayors, chiefs of police, attorneys general, and community organizers who have been doing significant work in bringing down violent crime in their communities. There is no one answer that fits everything. And it's about being engaged and multiple organizations being engaged.
And we just met, as a I said, with a bipartisan group of mayors, law enforcement, and community leaders. And we discussed a comprehensive strategy that I'm releasing today to combat the epidemic of gun violence and other violent crime that we've been seeing in our country for far too long, that has spiked since the start of the pandemic over a year ago.
For folks at home, here's what you need to know: I've been at this a long time, and there are things we know that work that reduce gun violence and violent crime and things that we don't know about. But things we know about: Background checks for purchasing a firearm are important; a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines—no one needs to have a weapon that can fire over 30, 40, 50, even up to 100 rounds unless you think the deer are wearing Kevlar vests or something; community policing and programs that keep neighborhoods safe and keep folks out of trouble.
The last time we had data on this issue of who is purchasing guns was more than 20 years ago. Five percent of gun dealers—it turns out, in the study we did—showed that 90 percent of illegal guns were found at the crime scenes sold by 5 percent of gun dealers. Five percent sold 90 percent of the guns found at crime scenes.
In April, I announced that the Justice Department is going to be issuing an annual report on gun trafficking so we can update that data. Today the Department is announcing, as I just did, a major crackdown on—to stem the flow of guns used to commit violent crimes. It's zero tolerance for gun dealers who willfully violate key existing laws and regulations. Let me repeat: zero tolerance.
Police Chief Murray of the Baltimore—excuse me, Police Chief Merritt—Police Chief Murphy Paul of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, talked about how he's coordinating more closely with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, the ATF, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the FBI, to help take on criminal organizations committing violent crimes in the city. This kind of coordination is essential to keeping the weapons of war out of the hands of dangerous criminals, fugitives, and gangs, as well as organized crime.
Third, we discussed historic funding—the—we discussed historic funding for States, cities, and counties, and Tribes for law enforcement and crime prevention. You know, they've not only had to fight this pandemic, they've also had to deal with economic crisis that has decimated their budgets, forced them to cut essential services, including law enforcement and social services.
Much of this relief has already arrived. The rest is on its way. And we're now providing more guidance on how they can use the $350 billion nationally that the American Rescue Plan has available to help reduce crime and address the root causes. For example, cities experiencing an increase in gun violence were able to use the American Rescue Plan dollars to hire police officers needed for community policing and to pay their overtime.
Mayors will also be able to buy crime-fighting technologies, like gunshot detection systems, to better see and stop gun violence in their communities. They can use the funding to scale up wraparound services for the residents as well, including substance abuse and mental health services that we know will make a difference to prevention of crime.
We know summer job training—summer jobs, training, and recreation for young people work. They help make sure young people pick up a paycheck instead of a pistol. One study found a Boston summer jobs program for youth reduction reduced violent crimes by 35 percent in Boston. Another study found that a program that offers high school students in Chicago a good summer job and an adult mentor and behavioral therapy led to a 45-percent drop in violence.
And for folks at home, the American Rescue Plan, which is a once-in-a-generation investment to reduce violence in America, is available. I'm proud of it. It means more police officers, more nurses, more counselors, more social workers, more community violence interrupters to help resolve issues before they escalate into crimes.
Fourth, we discussed the need to support community violence intervention. These are local programs that utilize trusted messengers and community members and leaders to work directly with people who are most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of gun crimes.
States and cities should invest the American Rescue Plan funds in those kinds of anti-violent crime programs. And today I'm announcing that the White House will be working with 15 jurisdictions that are doing exactly that—from Baltimore to Baton Rouge, and Memphis to Minneapolis—to build up their community violence intervention programs, starting this summer.
And Mayor Steve Allender of Rapid City, South Dakota—a Republican and a former chief of police himself—joined us today and will be a part of this effort to help disrupt cycles of crime and violence in his community and nearby Tribal communities. We need more mayors to follow, and I'm going to be pushing to keep—pushing for more of these proven programs, which are part of the American Jobs Plan and my budget.
And we need to keep building on the gun violence and crime-prevention strategy we're laying out today. Folks, this shouldn't be a red or blue issue, it's an American issue. We're not changing the Constitution; we're enforcing it, being reasonable. We're taking on the bad actors doing bad and dangerous things to our communities and to our country.
The President. Now, I'm not being a wise guy. There's no reason you should—have you seen my gun violence legislation I've introduced? As you know—because you're so involved—actually, crime is down; gun violence and murder rates are up. Guns. I'm the only guy that ever got passed legislation, when I was a Senator, that made sure we eliminated assault weapons. The idea you need a weapon that can have the ability to fire 20, 30, 40, 50, 120 shots from that weapon—whether it's a 9-millimeter pistol or whether it's a rifle—is ridiculous.
And when we did that, violent crime went down. All the criticism about the original crime bill—well, guess what? Crime went down until we stopped doing community policing. So it's about getting—we have availability now of over a billion—lots of money for cops to be able to hire psychologists, psychiatrists, as well as social workers to be engaged in the process.
Number three, when people are in fact in jail, they should be getting—if that's not the main crime, but they also did—they should be getting treatment while they are in jail.
Fourth, when people get out of jail—whether it's for drug addiction or any other crime—if they've served their time, they should have full access to everything from Pell grants, to public housing, to the like.
Terry understands. He knows—he knows—also about crime prevention as a top priority. He understands how important it is to have funding—to find funding—from the American Rescue Plan to provide law enforcement personnel with more resources, not fewer resources.
And one of the things -- look, when we had community policing initially in the late '90s, violent crimes dropped significantly, significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police.
And what -- but the cops made sure they had -- she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she pick up the phone and call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so, crime began to drop.
The rise of hate crimes against Asian Americans during the pandemic and the rise of anti-Semitism here in America and around the world.
And one of the things—look, when we had community policing, initially in the late nineties, violent crime dropped significantly—significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police. What I did: I eliminated the LEAA funding—Law Enforcement Assistance Act—and I put in place the proposal that required community policing.
And what—but the cops made sure they had—she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she'd pick up the phone on call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so crime began to drop.
These grants, which total nearly $140 million, will go to 183 law enforcement agencies and allow them to fund over 1,000 new law enforcement positions and to fund other initiatives to build legitimacy and trust in communities, to address gun violence and other violent crimes, and to combat hate and domestic extremism, and to enhance the response to people in crisis.
That also means building more affordable housing so people can have safe places closer to their jobs. Funding proven programs to help fight violent crime. We shouldn't be cutting funding for police departments. I proposed increasing funding.
And I've noticed, in my experience—when I wrote the first crime bill, I noticed that, you know, I don't hear many communities—no matter what their color or their background—saying, "I don't want more protection in my community." I don't know, I haven't found one of those yet.
And so I've asked the Congress to provide $200 million to invest in community violence intervention programs as well—they work; they work—where community members with credibility work directly with people that are most likely to commit crimes or be victims of gun crimes. And they work.
You know, I know this is a priority for Senator Schumer, what you all are doing here. I—if I hear one more call from him that we need more money for housing and more money for cops—I don't know, I'm going to send him back to you all. [Laughter] But all kidding aside, this is a half a billion dollars of proven strategies, and we know it will reduce crime.
You know, you can count on me to be a partner in that effort. And I have the U.S. Attorney—United States Attorney General here with me today. And we put together a comprehensive strategy to combat gun crime in cities like New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and many other cities—San Francisco.
But there's more we can do. Across the country, police departments report sharp increases in the number of ghost guns found at crime scenes. That's why, today, the department is launching an intensified National Ghost Gun Enforcement Initiative to determine and deter criminals from using those weapons to cover their tracks. If you commit a crime to the ghost gun, not only are State and local prosecutors going to come after you, but expect Federal charges and Federal prosecution as well.
Today the Attorney General directed all U.S. attorneys in the United States to prioritize combating gun trafficking across State lines and city boundaries. The Justice Department is sending additional prosecutorial resources to help shut down what's referred to, as you all know, as the "Iron Pipeline" that funnels guns from shops in States like Georgia to crime scenes in Baltimore and Philadelphia and New York and so many other places.
You know, I want more cities and States to use some of the $350 billion we sent to them on the American Rescue Plan to fight crime, to keep our communities safe by hiring more police officers for community policing and paying police overtime and purchasing gun-fighting technologies, like technologies that hears, locates gunshots so there can be immediate response because you know exactly where it came from.
The third thing our plan calls for: investing in critical services that reduce crime and violence; community violence intervention programs, like the one I'm going to see after this meeting; summer school; afterschool programs for teens.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
Well, what you did matters. Helping unemployed parents get back to work by covering childcare costs, like Oakland County, Michigan, did. Reducing gun crime by retaining police officers, like DeKalb County did in Georgia. Expanding community violence intervention programs, like King County did in Washington. Ensuring people get the full benefit of one of the most consequential tax cuts for working families in our history.
Tonight I say to the Russian oligarchs and the corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime: No more. The United States—[applause]—I mean it. The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of the Russian oligarchs.
Like some of you that have been around for a while—I've worked with you on these issues for a long time. I know what works: Investigating [Investing in]* crime prevention and community policing: cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety.
Folks, as I've just demonstrated, while it often appears we do not agree—[laughter]—and that—we do agree on a lot more things than we acknowledge. I signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year, from preventing Government shutdowns, to protecting Asian Americans from still-too-common hate crimes, to reforming military justice. And we'll soon be strengthening the Violence Against Women Act that I first wrote three decades ago.
My first week in office, I signed an Executive order directing Federal agencies to combat this resurgence of xenophobia. The Department of Justice is strengthening its partnership with the AAPI community to prevent these crimes, in addition to its other work to take on violent extremists and domestic terrorism.
Well, what I was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but I was able to say: "Okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? I'll put the lighting in." We've got a contractor. We've got the type of lighting. We paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the Government. And violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. Fewer people sought to leave.
Much more need be done, but the first—first, I want to rein in the proliferation of so-called "ghost guns." These are guns that are homemade, built from a kit that include directions on how to finish the firearm. You can go buy the kit. They have no serial numbers, so when they show up at a crime scene, they can't be traced.
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
Protecting our communities from violent crime is a top priority for the Department of Justice and one of our most important responsibilities. I'm glad the President brought us together today to discuss a subject of such importance to the public we serve. As our participants in today's roundtable have noted, the increase in violent crime in 2020 and early 2021 is deeply troubling.
That is why, last month, the Justice Department launched a comprehensive violent crime reduction strategy. This strategy is built around four principles: setting strategic enforcement priorities; fostering trust with and earning legitimacy in our communities; investing in community-based prevention and intervention programs; and measuring the results of these efforts through a decrease in violent crime, not merely by arrests and convictions, as if they were ends in themselves.
Now, we know that the lion's share of violent crime reduction work is shouldered by our State, local, Tribal, and Territorial law enforcement partners. Core to our strategy is targeted support of the critical work that you will be doing in the weeks and months ahead.
Every one of our U.S. attorney's offices is working with its local partners to establish an immediate plan to address the spike in violent crime that typically occurs during the summer. And the law enforcement components of the Department are making enhanced resources available to help prevent and disrupt violent crime and to focus on the most dangerous, most violent offenders.
The Department is also strengthening our Project Safe Neighborhoods, our cornerstone initiative that brings together law enforcement and community stakeholders to develop solutions to pressing violent crime problems.
We know that an effective violent crime reduction strategy must also address the illegal trafficking of firearms and focus on keeping guns out of the wrong hands. And so the Department is delivering on the promises we made here at the White House in April.
The Justice Department's violent crime reduction strategy and our initiatives to stem the rising tide of illegal guns will save lives. But these steps alone will not solve the problem of violent crime. Success depends on all of us joining together: those of you in this room, the many like you across the country who are working to keep their communities safe, and the people of our communities themselves.
The President. Thank you, General. Let me—before I begin, thank the participants in our roundtable today: two mayors—three mayors, chiefs of police, attorneys general, and community organizers who have been doing significant work in bringing down violent crime in their communities. There is no one answer that fits everything. And it's about being engaged and multiple organizations being engaged.
And we just met, as a I said, with a bipartisan group of mayors, law enforcement, and community leaders. And we discussed a comprehensive strategy that I'm releasing today to combat the epidemic of gun violence and other violent crime that we've been seeing in our country for far too long, that has spiked since the start of the pandemic over a year ago.
For folks at home, here's what you need to know: I've been at this a long time, and there are things we know that work that reduce gun violence and violent crime and things that we don't know about. But things we know about: Background checks for purchasing a firearm are important; a ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines—no one needs to have a weapon that can fire over 30, 40, 50, even up to 100 rounds unless you think the deer are wearing Kevlar vests or something; community policing and programs that keep neighborhoods safe and keep folks out of trouble.
The last time we had data on this issue of who is purchasing guns was more than 20 years ago. Five percent of gun dealers—it turns out, in the study we did—showed that 90 percent of illegal guns were found at the crime scenes sold by 5 percent of gun dealers. Five percent sold 90 percent of the guns found at crime scenes.
In April, I announced that the Justice Department is going to be issuing an annual report on gun trafficking so we can update that data. Today the Department is announcing, as I just did, a major crackdown on—to stem the flow of guns used to commit violent crimes. It's zero tolerance for gun dealers who willfully violate key existing laws and regulations. Let me repeat: zero tolerance.
Police Chief Murray of the Baltimore—excuse me, Police Chief Merritt—Police Chief Murphy Paul of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, talked about how he's coordinating more closely with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, the ATF, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the FBI, to help take on criminal organizations committing violent crimes in the city. This kind of coordination is essential to keeping the weapons of war out of the hands of dangerous criminals, fugitives, and gangs, as well as organized crime.
Third, we discussed historic funding—the—we discussed historic funding for States, cities, and counties, and Tribes for law enforcement and crime prevention. You know, they've not only had to fight this pandemic, they've also had to deal with economic crisis that has decimated their budgets, forced them to cut essential services, including law enforcement and social services.
Much of this relief has already arrived. The rest is on its way. And we're now providing more guidance on how they can use the $350 billion nationally that the American Rescue Plan has available to help reduce crime and address the root causes. For example, cities experiencing an increase in gun violence were able to use the American Rescue Plan dollars to hire police officers needed for community policing and to pay their overtime.
Mayors will also be able to buy crime-fighting technologies, like gunshot detection systems, to better see and stop gun violence in their communities. They can use the funding to scale up wraparound services for the residents as well, including substance abuse and mental health services that we know will make a difference to prevention of crime.
We know summer job training—summer jobs, training, and recreation for young people work. They help make sure young people pick up a paycheck instead of a pistol. One study found a Boston summer jobs program for youth reduction reduced violent crimes by 35 percent in Boston. Another study found that a program that offers high school students in Chicago a good summer job and an adult mentor and behavioral therapy led to a 45-percent drop in violence.
And for folks at home, the American Rescue Plan, which is a once-in-a-generation investment to reduce violence in America, is available. I'm proud of it. It means more police officers, more nurses, more counselors, more social workers, more community violence interrupters to help resolve issues before they escalate into crimes.
Fourth, we discussed the need to support community violence intervention. These are local programs that utilize trusted messengers and community members and leaders to work directly with people who are most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of gun crimes.
States and cities should invest the American Rescue Plan funds in those kinds of anti-violent crime programs. And today I'm announcing that the White House will be working with 15 jurisdictions that are doing exactly that—from Baltimore to Baton Rouge, and Memphis to Minneapolis—to build up their community violence intervention programs, starting this summer.
And Mayor Steve Allender of Rapid City, South Dakota—a Republican and a former chief of police himself—joined us today and will be a part of this effort to help disrupt cycles of crime and violence in his community and nearby Tribal communities. We need more mayors to follow, and I'm going to be pushing to keep—pushing for more of these proven programs, which are part of the American Jobs Plan and my budget.
And we need to keep building on the gun violence and crime-prevention strategy we're laying out today. Folks, this shouldn't be a red or blue issue, it's an American issue. We're not changing the Constitution; we're enforcing it, being reasonable. We're taking on the bad actors doing bad and dangerous things to our communities and to our country.
But the purpose of the meeting today is, we've convened a group of law enforcement and other community leaders, including mayors of the—of our cities: one, to thank them for their service because we owe them big time; second, to hear directly from each of them about reducing violent crime and, particularly, gun violence in their communities.
While there's no one-size-fit-all approach, we know there are some things that work, and the first of those that work is stemming the flow of firearms used to commit violent crimes. And we've talked—you and I have talked about this, Mayor, before.
Third, our plan invests in community violence and intervention. We—what we want to do is, when we—we know we utilize trusted community members and encourage more community policing, we can intervene before the violence erupts, at least that's what, I think, consensus and our experience. And community violence intervention programs have shown to reduce crime in some cities by up to 60 percent.
Fourthly, our strategy to fund the other vital services, like mental health and substance abuse disorder programs, job training, and summer job programs. And this is going to help prevent crime and support young people to pick up a paycheck instead of a pistol.
We recognize that we have to come together to fulfill the first responsibility of a democracy, and that's keep each other safe. And that's what the American people are looking for when it comes to reducing violent crime and gun violence.
The President. Now, I'm not being a wise guy. There's no reason you should—have you seen my gun violence legislation I've introduced? As you know—because you're so involved—actually, crime is down; gun violence and murder rates are up. Guns. I'm the only guy that ever got passed legislation, when I was a Senator, that made sure we eliminated assault weapons. The idea you need a weapon that can have the ability to fire 20, 30, 40, 50, 120 shots from that weapon—whether it's a 9-millimeter pistol or whether it's a rifle—is ridiculous.
And when we did that, violent crime went down. All the criticism about the original crime bill—well, guess what? Crime went down until we stopped doing community policing. So it's about getting—we have availability now of over a billion—lots of money for cops to be able to hire psychologists, psychiatrists, as well as social workers to be engaged in the process.
Number three, when people are in fact in jail, they should be getting—if that's not the main crime, but they also did—they should be getting treatment while they are in jail.
Fourth, when people get out of jail—whether it's for drug addiction or any other crime—if they've served their time, they should have full access to everything from Pell grants, to public housing, to the like.
The rise of hate crimes against Asian Americans during the pandemic and the rise of anti-Semitism here in America and around the world.
These grants, which total nearly $140 million, will go to 183 law enforcement agencies and allow them to fund over 1,000 new law enforcement positions and to fund other initiatives to build legitimacy and trust in communities, to address gun violence and other violent crimes, and to combat hate and domestic extremism, and to enhance the response to people in crisis.
With my American Rescue Plan, which passed right after historic investment in community policing and violence intervention programs that are shown to reduce violence crime—violent crime as much as 60 percent. We don't have to spend less money, we have to spend more money on police to give them the kind of help they genuinely need. Why is a police officer showing up to a suicide threat, someone threatening to jump off a building? We need more social workers there. We need more psychologists there. They need help. They're basically good people, prevent violence in the first place.
And I've noticed, in my experience—when I wrote the first crime bill, I noticed that, you know, I don't hear many communities—no matter what their color or their background—saying, "I don't want more protection in my community." I don't know, I haven't found one of those yet.
And so I've asked the Congress to provide $200 million to invest in community violence intervention programs as well—they work; they work—where community members with credibility work directly with people that are most likely to commit crimes or be victims of gun crimes. And they work.
You know, I know this is a priority for Senator Schumer, what you all are doing here. I—if I hear one more call from him that we need more money for housing and more money for cops—I don't know, I'm going to send him back to you all. [Laughter] But all kidding aside, this is a half a billion dollars of proven strategies, and we know it will reduce crime.
You know, you can count on me to be a partner in that effort. And I have the U.S. Attorney—United States Attorney General here with me today. And we put together a comprehensive strategy to combat gun crime in cities like New York, Philadelphia, Atlanta, and many other cities—San Francisco.
But there's more we can do. Across the country, police departments report sharp increases in the number of ghost guns found at crime scenes. That's why, today, the department is launching an intensified National Ghost Gun Enforcement Initiative to determine and deter criminals from using those weapons to cover their tracks. If you commit a crime to the ghost gun, not only are State and local prosecutors going to come after you, but expect Federal charges and Federal prosecution as well.
Today the Attorney General directed all U.S. attorneys in the United States to prioritize combating gun trafficking across State lines and city boundaries. The Justice Department is sending additional prosecutorial resources to help shut down what's referred to, as you all know, as the "Iron Pipeline" that funnels guns from shops in States like Georgia to crime scenes in Baltimore and Philadelphia and New York and so many other places.
You know, I want more cities and States to use some of the $350 billion we sent to them on the American Rescue Plan to fight crime, to keep our communities safe by hiring more police officers for community policing and paying police overtime and purchasing gun-fighting technologies, like technologies that hears, locates gunshots so there can be immediate response because you know exactly where it came from.
The third thing our plan calls for: investing in critical services that reduce crime and violence; community violence intervention programs, like the one I'm going to see after this meeting; summer school; afterschool programs for teens.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
Tonight I say to the Russian oligarchs and the corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime: No more. The United States—[applause]—I mean it. The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of the Russian oligarchs.
Like some of you that have been around for a while—I've worked with you on these issues for a long time. I know what works: Investigating [Investing in]* crime prevention and community policing: cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety.
Folks, as I've just demonstrated, while it often appears we do not agree—[laughter]—and that—we do agree on a lot more things than we acknowledge. I signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year, from preventing Government shutdowns, to protecting Asian Americans from still-too-common hate crimes, to reforming military justice. And we'll soon be strengthening the Violence Against Women Act that I first wrote three decades ago.
Buyers aren't required to pass background checks. Because guns have no serial numbers—these guns—when they show up at a crime scene, they can't be traced. Harder to find and prove who used them. Meaning you can't connect the gun to the shooter and hold them accountable.
In fact, the ATF reports that they've been able to trace less than 1 percent—less than 1 percent—of ghost guns reported by law enforcement. And so it makes sense that police across the country are increasingly finding ghost guns at crime scenes. And by the way, ghost guns can be, quote, "rifles"—essentially assault weapons as well. This is one version of the kit you can buy.
All of a sudden, it's no longer a ghost; it has a return address. And it's going to help save lives, reduce crime, and get more criminals off the streets. And this rule is only part of our strategy to go after ghost guns.
If you commit a crime with a ghost gun, expect Federal prosecution, not just State. Expect Federal prosecution. This rule is an important step. It's going to make a difference, I promise you. And there are a lot of other things we know work to reduce gun violence and other violent crimes and save lives.
In addition today—in addition to today's rule, we're working on four areas. First, we're going after rogue gun dealers. The last time we had data on this was more than 20 years ago. Five percent of gun dealers sold 90 percent of illegal guns found at crime scenes. Five percent sold 90 percent.
The Justice Department is surging prosecutorial resources to help shut down these trafficking corridors, including the one known as the "Iron Pipeline" that funnels weapons from gun shops in States like Georgia to crime scenes up and down the East Coast.
Thirdly, we're funding strategies we know reduce gun crime: community policing and community violence interruption. Look, I've said it many times: The answer is not to defund the police. It's to fund the police and give them the tools and training to support—they need to be the partners and the protectors of our communities in need.
And I've already made clear that I want cities, States, counties, and Tribes to use some of the $350 billion we sent to them in the American Rescue Plan—that I wrote in the first month—to reduce gun violence, hire police officers for community policing, pay police overtime, purchase crime-fighting technologies. They were given the money. They can do it. Spend it.
And now, on top of that, I'm calling for additional funding to put police on the streets for community policing. One thing we learned in the middle of the crime wave not long ago: When the cop knows by first name who owns the corner drug store, who lives in the apartment above 6B, who the people who are—the pastors of the churches, guess what? People talk to them. They trust them.
My son was the attorney general in Delaware. He'd go around and make sure everybody, literally, in these high-crime-rate neighborhoods—he'd give them his personal cell phone number and instructed all of the cops to do the same thing. And they did. And the crime plummeted. Not a joke. Look at the record. Not just my son, but all across the Nation.
And for the AFT [ATF]* to hire agents they need to help the fight gun crime—more agents.
We're also investing in community violence intervention. These are areas, local programs that utilize trusted messengers—community members and leaders—to work directly with people who are the most likely to commit a gun crime or become victims of gun crime—get to them early. It works. It works. They intervene before it's too late.
These are all demonstrated ways to reduce crime. And I'm strongly urging cities, States, counties, and Tribes to use the Rescue Plan funding we've sent them to do more in each of these areas. And they need to do more and do it quickly, before the summer, when crime typically surges around America.
Steve also partnered with the community leaders and law enforcement to help prevent violent crime. He's worked with the police to combat domestic extremism and to take violent criminals off the street. Steve's record makes him ready on day one to lead this agency.
We all agreed, as I've said from the outset, that the answer is not to defund the police. The answer is to fund the police with the resources and training they need to protect our communities, investing in crime prevention and accountable community police officers who will walk the beat, know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety in the neighborhoods. That's what it is. When you know who owns a local liquor store, know who the pastor of the church is, know—it makes a big difference when you know the community. And that's been my approach from day one.
Across the country, State and local leaders answered the call. And already, more than one—more than $10 billion of the American Rescue Plan funds have been committed to violence prevention and public safety across America. In fact, in—2021 was one of the strongest years on record when it comes to Federal support delivered directly to State and local governments to address and prevent crime.
And in Houston, Mayor Sylvester Turner, who I've spent some time with, and Troy Finner, the—who is the police chief, they're using ARP funds to improve medical health services—mental health services, excuse me—domestic violence and response efforts. Because they've realized that when there's a domestic violence problem, it's not always necessary to send a cop with a gun. You have to send someone who can talk people through things. And so—and funding a community reentry program and police overtime pay so an additional 125 officers can be present in areas where violent crime occurs most frequently.
Community violence intervention is about using tested messages, community leaders, community members to directly work with people who are the most likely to commit gun crimes or become victims of those gun crimes. And it works. They intervene before it's too late, with public health and safety approaches that work.
As I said in the Cabinet Room, you know, the idea that when you get let out of prison after serving your time you get 25 bucks and a bus ticket, and you're going to end up under the same bridge you came from before. But you should be entitled, if you've served your time, to everything from Pell grants to food—to food stamps, the whole deal, to be able to take advantage of changing your life. And my administration is investing in those elements. The cities, the counties, and the States should be doing the same thing with the money they have because they are demonstrated ways to reduce crime.
But look, with regard to the leniency of prosecutors, that has, on balance, not been the biggest problem—the leniency of prosecutors. In the past, the hardest process—have been the intensity of prosecutors, people getting long sentences for crimes that are—anyway.
And so, and my—and bail reform—I think bail reform and the negative side of bail reform is vastly overrated. The idea that if you have no ability to make bail because you're poor, it should relate to the severity of the crime and what you—what the problem is related that you're accused of.
So the idea that somehow there's this overwhelming desire to protect a bad cop—it's the leadership's role to make sure they find them, get rid of them, and if they violate a crime, prosecute them.
We should focus on and fund the things we know that work, like crime prevention and community policing. Not one cop in a car, but two walking the street. Cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, who can restore trust and safety.
And it's working. More than 300 communities, from big cities to small towns, are using more than $10 billion of American Rescue Plan funds for violence prevention and public safety this year: building new police training facilities; recruiting, which is getting harder; hiring; and giving policemen a raise; partnering with the Federal, State, and local community groups to reduce gun violence; investing in community interventions that use trusted community members to work directly with people who are most likely to commit gun crimes or become the victims of gun crimes and intervene before it's too late.
With my budget last year, we increased funding for State and local law enforcement by almost—well, not almost—29 percent. That included significant investment in Community Oriented Policing Services, the "COPS" program designed to build legitimacy and trust in communities, to address violent crime, to combat hate and extremism.
My budget for next year doubles the investment in community policing, three-hundred—$573 million [$537 million],* the most in over a decade. And on top of that, it includes $30 billion in new mandatory investments in law enforcement and crime prevention.
It's time they move. It's time to States and the localities spend the money they have to deal with crime, as well as retrain police officers, as well as provide for more community policing. It's time to get on with doing that. And that's what I think the message last night from the American public was in all the primaries.
It requires young people ages 18 to 21 to undergo enhanced background checks. It includes the first-ever Federal law that makes gun trafficking and straw purchases distinct Federal crimes for the first time. It clarifies who needs to register as a federally licensed gun dealer and run background checks before selling a single weapon.
Look, you know, it invests in antiviolence programs that work—that work directly with the people who are most likely to commit these crimes or become victims of gun crimes. Today we say more than "enough." We say more than "enough." It's time—when it seems impossible to get anything done in Washington, we are doing something consequential. If we can reach compromise on guns, we ought to be able to reach compromise in other critical issues, from veterans' health care to cutting-edge American innovation and so much more.
One, this law includes the first-ever Federal law that makes gun trafficking and straw purchases explicit Federal crimes. It clarifies who needs to register as a federally licensed gun dealer and run background checks before selling a single weapon. It invests in antiviolence programs that work directly with the communities most at risk for gun crimes.
But for too long, too many families haven't had that peace of mind. They watch the news and they see kids being gunned down in schools and on the streets. Almost every single night you turn the news on, that's what you see. They see their neighbors lose their loved ones to drugs like fentanyl, which is a flat killer. They see hate and anger and violence just walking the streets of America, and they just want to feel safe again. They want to feel a sense of security. And that's what my crime plan is all about.
Here in Pennsylvania, Governor Wolf is using $250 million of that money to reduce crime and violence across this State. And Mayor Brown just described how it's helping to fund community policing here in Wilkes-Barre.
And I mean it. Folks, when it comes to fighting crime, we know what works: officers on the street who know the neighborhood—not a joke—who know the neighborhood; who know the families they're protecting; who get the training they need to be able to do their jobs well; who work to earn the community's trust.
If I can just interject for a moment—my deceased son Beau, he was the attorney general of the State of Delaware. And what he used to do is go down, in the east side, the—called the "Bucket"—highest crime rate in the country. It's a place where I used to—I was the only White guy that worked as a lifeguard down in that area, on the east side.
And so I got her—so that—I got a phone number for the local cops. She'd call. They promised not to identify her, because they knew there'd be retribution. And the crime rate began to drop. For real. Not a joke.
You've got to know people. You've got to know and you've got to be able to trust the police. And the police had to be able to trust the community. But we slipped away from that. And we have a hell of a lot fewer cops today than we did when I wrote that initial crime bill. But now we've got to get back to it.
Without that, victims don't call for help, witnesses don't step forward, crimes go unsolved, justice isn't served.
Look, I'm prouder that, after 7 years, we finally have a Senate-confirmed Director of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, responsible for fighting gun crime. For 7 years, the other team would not let us appoint anyone to that job—incredibly important job—to help local law enforcement, Federal law enforcement, identify the ballistics, a whole range of things. For 7 years. We finally got it passed this time out, barely. Seven years, because didn't they didn't want anybody in that job. My plan gives the Bureau the funding to hire more agents, to stop gun trafficking.
Folks, look, we can help local law enforcement. We can solve more gun crimes if we have the—someone heading up, which we finally do, this organization that's designed to track this kind of behavior.
Finally, my plan invests in crime prevention programs that help keep young people from getting in trouble in the first place. Under my plan, communities can, one, provide after-school and summer job programs they get paid for. More access to mental health and drug counseling. More social workers and housing to keep people off the streets instead of when they get out of—when they get out of jail, they get 25 cent—dollars and a bus ticket, and they end up under the same bridge that they were under before. This will help prevent crime and get young people to pick up paychecks instead of a pistol.
All these steps will prevent crime, not increase it.
Leader McCarthy talked about waiting—wanting a nation that's safe. Well, let's look at what Republicans have done to make it safe. They voted against virtually everything we've done to reduce crime and keep communities safe.
And another thing that we know is that voters spoke clearly about their concerns—about raising costs—the rising costs that they're—and the need to get inflation down. There are still a lot of people hurting that are very concerned. And it's about crime and public safety. And they sent a clear and unmistakable message that they want to preserve our democracy and protect the right to choose in this country.
He travels to war zones to end genocides and war crimes, exposes war profiteers, helps refugees, and advances the rights of journalists. Raises millions of dollars to support 9/11 first responders; victims of natural disaster; and advocates who, along with him, are combating hate.
Yet, for all the progress, this community has experienced profound hate, pain, and violence and loss with the rise of anti-hate crime—Asian anti-hate [anti-Asian hate; White House correction] crimes. You know, gut-wrenching attacks on elderly immigrant women.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then—since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the antifraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars—billions of dollars—from the American people.
Look, COVID left its scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know. But too often, that trust is violated.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
With your help, I signed a law more than a hundred years in the making to finally make lynching a Federal hate crime—the Emmett Till law. It's amazing. A hundred years. And I—it's astounding.
As Judy shared with me, this is a tight-knit community, with intergenerational households and deep reverence and respect for its elders. A community that's opened its heart and its homes to friends and neighbors and stood strong throughout the pandemic as anti-Asian hate crimes rose. A community that in the face of horrific tragedy has become a symbol of hope and resilience, pushing forward together, healing together.
But, folks, we also know that for generations of progress, racism, harassment, and hate crimes persist. As I've said many times, hate can have no safe harbor in America. Silence—silence—is complicity. And we will not remain silent. That's why, with the help of many of you, I signed into law the bipartisan COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act, and I hosted the first-ever White House Summit Against Hate-Fueled Violence.
For the first time ever, we explicitly made gun trafficking a Federal crime. They say: "What the hell? It wasn't already?" [Laughter] No, I'm serious. Think about it.
You go home and tell your mother, father, brother, sister, aunt, and uncle that, "Whoa, gun trafficking is now a crime." They're going to look at you like: "What are you talking about? It's always been a crime." It wasn't a crime.
We did the same thing for straw purchases. That's when a middleman, who can pass the background check, buys a gun usually for someone who can't pass the background check. It's now a Federal crime if you do that.
It's being challenged in court, but so far, it matters. That allow anyone to assemble a gun at home, bought from several different places, in as little as 30 minutes. Come on. These weapons don't have serial numbers. That's why they like to buy them, so criminals can use them to commit crimes and not leave behind a registration of who owned the weapon.
And the budget I submitted to Congress would help reduce crime by increasing funding to go after gun traffickers. And for the—by the way—you know what I get when I—we're talking about the fentanyl at the border and all that? I speak with the President of Mexico. "Will you stop sending guns to us?" We are sending dangerous weapons, particularly assault weapons, to Mexico. To Mexico. They're asking us: "Please stop it. Cut it off at the border."
Look, ladies and gentlemen, for those who say they're concerned about crime, you can't deal with crime without dealing with gun violence. It's a simple proposition.
Let me close with this. In the last 2 years, we've shared some powerful moments together. I stood with the CBC and Bennie and Danny and the family of Emmett and Mamie Till at the lynching—they—it allowed us for the first—think about this. We've been fighting to make lynching a Federal hate crime, and I finally got to sign an Executive order doing that. Established a national monument so we'd always remember them and they couldn't rewrite history.
Look, folks, we know pride also means feeling safe in your neighborhoods. The fact that we've made enormous progress preventing and reducing crime through the American Rescue Plan. We've made one of the biggest investments in local public safety ever: over $15 billion. And much of it has gone directly to you to hire for your departments.
You've done a tremendous job. You really have. You've done a tremendous job putting these resources to work. You know how to do it. And I'm not being solicitous. Mayors are the people who get things done: hiring more officers for accountable community policing, investing in violence intervention programs proven to reduce crime.
Across the country, violent crime is at—rates are falling. In some cities, it's going up, but overall—but not everywhere—overall, we are—we—they're falling, these rates—down nearly in every major category. Record declines in homicide. It matters.
And I think we'd all just love to hear—obviously, we're gratified, as you alluded to, that crime rates have fallen across the country this past year. But I think we'd all love to hear: What are your thoughts and plans moving forward for how the Federal Government can partner with cities to continue that momentum and to help us keep our communities safe?
The President. Well, thank you, Mr. Mayor. Look, I spent a significant portion of my career as chairman of the Judiciary Committee, which did almost all the crime legislation that exists. And in the last administration—in 2020, for example, we had the largest increase in murders we've ever had in all of America. Not blaming it on the—that President, particularly.
And so, when I got elected, I acted to turn it around. And so have you. In 2023, violent crime came down significantly. It's one of the largest yearly declines of homicide ever.
And thanks to the law enforcement and community leaders here today who have helped bring down violent crime rates in their cities to historic lows.
Last year, the United States had one of the lowest rates of all violent crime—of all violent crimes in more than 50 years. Murder, rape, aggravated assault, robbery all dropped sharply, along with burglary, property crime, and theft. And it matters.
As President, public safety and crime reduction is a top priority for my administration and for me. And it has been for a long time, back when I was chairman of the Judiciary Committee.
As was referenced, during the pandemic, States and cities saw violent crime rising, and their budgets were strained as they faced deep cuts in law enforcement and public safety. But we stepped up.
We invested $15 billion—$15 billion—to make their communities safer, and we added billions more in grants to help. The Justice Department invested in law enforcement and community violence-interruption programs. Because of the American Rescue Plan, we have the largest Federal investment of fighting crime and preventing violent crime in any time in our history. And that's a big deal.
You know, we're—we know being in law enforcement is harder than ever. But—and we expect you to be everything to everybody. That's why we've invested in more crisis responders who work alongside police officers—as Chief said, mental health and social workers—to respond to nonviolent crimes as well.
The chiefs in this room know that when their communities trust the police, we can solve a hell of a lot more crimes a hell of a lot faster. That's why I signed the historic Executive order to advance executive [effective; White House correction] and accountable community policing, and it's very effective so far. You know, and I'm going to continue to call on Congress to pass the George Floyd Policing and Justice—the Justice in Policing Act so we can make police reform the law of the land.
We've also made historic investments in proven strategies to interrupt and prevent crime and violence in the first place. These programs use trusted messengers, including people who are in the neighborhood, people who have been incarcerated and are released now, people who have been through it, people who know what they're talking about.
And we have a track record of reducing violent crime, as a consequence of that, by 30 to 60 percent where those programs exist.
Remember the spikes in crime and the murder rate? A raging virus that took more than 1 million American lives of loved ones, millions left behind. A mental health crisis of isolation and loneliness.
Last year, the murder rate saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime fell to one of its lowest levels in more than 50 years.
Give communities the tools to crack down on gun crime, retail crime, and carjacking. Keep building trust, as I've been doing, by taking executive action on police reform and calling for it to be the law of the land.
Take on crimes of domestic violence. I'm ramping up the Federal enforcement of the Violence Against Women Act that I proudly wrote when I was a Senator so we can finally—finally end the scourge against women in America.
Last year, murder rates saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime led—fell to one of the lowest levels more than—in more than 50 years. I'm ramping up Federal enforcement to violence—for the Violence Against Women Act, which I proudly wrote, so we can finally end the scourge of violence against women.
Audience member. [Inaudible]—is a war crime!
And because of his ridiculous, insane and very stupid policies, people are coming in and they're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen. We call it migrant crime. I call it Biden migrant crime. They're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen before. And you're reading it, like these three incredible young girls over the last few days.
Number three, the crimes that you are still charged with. And think of all the civil penalties you have. How many billions of dollars do you owe in civil penalties for molesting a woman in public, for doing a whole range of things, of having sex with a porn star on the night – and while your wife was pregnant?
What happens now is, if you in fact are, in going to—you arrest someone because they had—and you want to charge them, you can charge them with robbery or armed robbery. You charge them with armed robbery, you get a lot more time than if you don't charge with robbery. But if you want to make sure that someone who doesn't know much about their representation is able to, yes, you engage in prosecutorial misconduct by offering them to plead to, essentially—I mean, it's not the same—burglary, which gets them 2 years in probation and—so you don't even get a trial. You plead because you don't have adequate representation. You feel like everything is against you, and you're in trouble. When I did the sentencing act, that was designed to keep—make sure we had the same time for the same crime.
As chairman of the Judiciary Committee, I looked at all 10 Federal districts—and we took 6 months to do it—and found out if you're Black, and you—or your first-time offense of being accused of burglary—and maybe you committed it, and you were White and you did the same exact crime—in all 10 districts throughout the United States of America, a person—and don't hold me to the exact numbers, but the percentages are right—if you're a first-time White guy, you'd get 2 years; you'd get 7 years if you were Black.
So in order to make sure that you could not send people to jail for the same crime, I came up with this—this Sentencing Commission, which said that you—everybody who commits the crime has to receive between—instead of zero to 20 years, you drastically cut down the number of years you could go to jail. But say you have to—if you—if it's a one—first-time offense, you have to get sentenced between 1½ and 3 years. Okay?
Well, what I was able to do is not give money to the head of state, because so many are corrupt, but I was able to say: "Okay, you need lighting in the streets to change things? I'll put the lighting in." We've got a contractor. We've got the type of lighting. We paid directly to the contractor; it did not go through the Government. And violent crime significantly was reduced in that city. Fewer people sought to leave.
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
And finally, there's much more to be done and so much more to do—tackling voting rights, which is an existential threat to democracy right now. The things that are being asked are just beyond the pale. And the Vice President has been working hard on this issue and is going to continue to—we all are—but there's much more to do. We have to tackle the immigration problem, which we're working really hard to get done in a humane and serious way. Police reform and crime.
The President. Now, I'm not being a wise guy. There's no reason you should—have you seen my gun violence legislation I've introduced? As you know—because you're so involved—actually, crime is down; gun violence and murder rates are up. Guns. I'm the only guy that ever got passed legislation, when I was a Senator, that made sure we eliminated assault weapons. The idea you need a weapon that can have the ability to fire 20, 30, 40, 50, 120 shots from that weapon—whether it's a 9-millimeter pistol or whether it's a rifle—is ridiculous.
And when we did that, violent crime went down. All the criticism about the original crime bill—well, guess what? Crime went down until we stopped doing community policing. So it's about getting—we have availability now of over a billion—lots of money for cops to be able to hire psychologists, psychiatrists, as well as social workers to be engaged in the process.
Number three, when people are in fact in jail, they should be getting—if that's not the main crime, but they also did—they should be getting treatment while they are in jail.
Fourth, when people get out of jail—whether it's for drug addiction or any other crime—if they've served their time, they should have full access to everything from Pell grants, to public housing, to the like.
We have a full agenda to discuss: the pandemic, the economy, immigration, voting rights, and hate crimes.
Today we honor everyone impacted by this tragedy. And we think about all the pain during this pandemic, with the rise of hate crimes, harassment, bullying, and other forms of bias against Asian Americans. It seems not to stop.
And one of the things -- look, when we had community policing initially in the late '90s, violent crimes dropped significantly, significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police.
And what -- but the cops made sure they had -- she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she pick up the phone and call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so, crime began to drop.
And one of the things—look, when we had community policing, initially in the late nineties, violent crime dropped significantly—significantly. And the reason it did is because we had significant number of police. What I did: I eliminated the LEAA funding—Law Enforcement Assistance Act—and I put in place the proposal that required community policing.
And what—but the cops made sure they had—she had their phone number. So, when a drug deal was going down, she'd pick up the phone on call and say to that police officer with a cell phone that the drug deal is going down, knowing that she would never be fingered, knowing that she would never be the one told it happened. And so crime began to drop.
Tonight I say to the Russian oligarchs and the corrupt leaders who have bilked billions of dollars off this violent regime: No more. The United States—[applause]—I mean it. The United States Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of the Russian oligarchs.
Like some of you that have been around for a while—I've worked with you on these issues for a long time. I know what works: Investigating [Investing in]* crime prevention and community policing: cops who walk the beat, who know the neighborhood, and who can restore trust and safety.
Folks, as I've just demonstrated, while it often appears we do not agree—[laughter]—and that—we do agree on a lot more things than we acknowledge. I signed 80 bipartisan bills into law last year, from preventing Government shutdowns, to protecting Asian Americans from still-too-common hate crimes, to reforming military justice. And we'll soon be strengthening the Violence Against Women Act that I first wrote three decades ago.
And the President and I, and all of us as leaders, will not be silent. We will not stand by. We must always speak out against violence, against hate crime and discrimination, whenever and wherever it occurs. And we must do everything in our power to end this epidemic of hate.
But look, we know that for the generations of progress, racism, harassment, and hate crimes persist, as was pointed out by my friends behind me. And today we know that maybe you are one of them who don't feel safe walking American streets.
And I know we can do this together. I really mean it. We can do this together. Last year, with Susan here at the White House, I signed a bipartisan COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act that included provisions named after Heather that are going to help State and local law enforcement better identify and respond to hate crimes.
And I'm going to say it again: I am not going to stop till we ban assault weapons. We have to ban assault weapons. I mean it. We did it once before. And when we did, mass crimes plummeted.
Let me close where I started: by thanking all of you and two people in particular, Rana and—Sodhi is a brother of Balbir Singh Sodhi, one of the first American victims of post-9/11 hate crimes. On this day in 2001, with Ground Zero smoldering, he was targeted, shot, and killed at work in Arizona by a White supremacist. To honor his memory, last year during the Asian American History Month here at the White House, we displayed the turban he used to wear with pride.
And in those towns where we are applying those actions—particularly the program we call Sembrando Vida, which means "sowing life," and Youth Building the Future Program—we've not just seen a reduction of people wanting to migrate to the United States seeking opportunities of better living conditions and jobs, but for many young people of those countries, crime has stopped being the only possibility of survival and the only way to move forward in life.
As I was telling you—I was telling Prime Minister Trudeau and President Biden—their teams, I was telling them as well: We only have two campaigns—publicity or propaganda campaigns—in the Government, in my administration. One is dedicated or devoted to not consuming drugs: "Say no to drugs." Because we have to also think of that. It became quite a famous thing—public fame. Everything related to gangs. They are even series of gangs and organized crime—gangs of organized crimes.
Many cities from Newark, New Jersey; to Baton Rouge, Louisiana—[laughter]—but all kidding aside—have made major investments in community violence intervention initiatives. These studies have shown, in some cases, they can reduce violent crime up to 60 percent, particularly among our youth. It doesn't always do that much, but it can do that—that much.
But as you mayors know better than most, when you see these problems of crime and the opioid epidemic, you know that a big part of that is mental health—mental health. And I want to take a moment to talk to you about how we're addressing that as well.
Last year, I told you the watchdogs are back. Since then—since then, we've recovered billions of taxpayers' dollars. Now let's triple the antifraud strike force going after these criminals, double the statute of limitations on these crimes, and crack down on identity fraud by criminal syndicates stealing billions of dollars—billions of dollars—from the American people.
Look, COVID left its scars, like the spike in violent crime in 2020, the first year of the pandemic. We have an obligation to make sure all people are safe. Public safety depends on public trust, as all of us know. But too often, that trust is violated.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
We're holding Russia accountable for its aggression and for its war crimes and crimes against humanity that Russia is committing, as I speak, in Ukraine.
Russian forces are committing war crimes. It's as simple as that. It's stunning. Who is prepared to walk away from holding Putin accountable for this behavior? Who among us is really prepared to do that?

Look, folks, we know pride also means feeling safe in your neighborhoods. The fact that we've made enormous progress preventing and reducing crime through the American Rescue Plan. We've made one of the biggest investments in local public safety ever: over $15 billion. And much of it has gone directly to you to hire for your departments.
You've done a tremendous job. You really have. You've done a tremendous job putting these resources to work. You know how to do it. And I'm not being solicitous. Mayors are the people who get things done: hiring more officers for accountable community policing, investing in violence intervention programs proven to reduce crime.
Across the country, violent crime is at—rates are falling. In some cities, it's going up, but overall—but not everywhere—overall, we are—we—they're falling, these rates—down nearly in every major category. Record declines in homicide. It matters.
And I think we'd all just love to hear—obviously, we're gratified, as you alluded to, that crime rates have fallen across the country this past year. But I think we'd all love to hear: What are your thoughts and plans moving forward for how the Federal Government can partner with cities to continue that momentum and to help us keep our communities safe?
The President. Well, thank you, Mr. Mayor. Look, I spent a significant portion of my career as chairman of the Judiciary Committee, which did almost all the crime legislation that exists. And in the last administration—in 2020, for example, we had the largest increase in murders we've ever had in all of America. Not blaming it on the—that President, particularly.
And so, when I got elected, I acted to turn it around. And so have you. In 2023, violent crime came down significantly. It's one of the largest yearly declines of homicide ever.
The American Rescue Plan also made one of the biggest investments ever in local public safety. All of you have done a tremendous job putting these resources to work: hiring more officers for accountable, effective community policing; supporting violence intervention programs that help prevent crime in the first place—and they work.
Folks don't always hear about it, but the fact is, we're making tremendous progress. Violent crime rates are falling all across the Nation, down nearly in every major category. Record declines in homicides.
Remember the spikes in crime and the murder rate? A raging virus that took more than 1 million American lives of loved ones, millions left behind. A mental health crisis of isolation and loneliness.
Last year, the murder rate saw the sharpest decrease in history. Violent crime fell to one of its lowest levels in more than 50 years.
Give communities the tools to crack down on gun crime, retail crime, and carjacking. Keep building trust, as I've been doing, by taking executive action on police reform and calling for it to be the law of the land.
Take on crimes of domestic violence. I'm ramping up the Federal enforcement of the Violence Against Women Act that I proudly wrote when I was a Senator so we can finally—finally end the scourge against women in America.
Folks, at the same time, Americans deserve the freedom to be safe from crime. And America is safer today than when I took office. Starting with the American Rescue Plan, I made the biggest investment in public safety effort. And you used it well.
You, all of you, have done a tremendous job in your communities putting those resources to work, using Federal money to hire more officers for effective, accountable community policing; expanding violence intervention programs that help prevent crime.
Folks, you don't always hear about it, but today's violent crime rates are down nationwide in nearly every major category, to one of the lowest levels in over 50 years. But there's more to do, but we're making American progress—serious progress.
We'll never forget the rise of anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. And I'm proud to have signed the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support.
We'll never forget him lying about the pandemic. We'll never forget the rise of anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. I'm proud to have had to—I'm not proud to have had to, but I'm proud to have signed and—the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support.
We've also provided historic value in funding for public safety and local communities, and it's bringing us results. We're seeing a 50-year low in violent crime in America. San Francisco, for example, anti-Asian hate crimes are down 75 percent over the last 2 years.
We'll never forget the rise in anti-Asian hate crimes during the pandemic. And I was proud to have signed the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act with your support to help States, cities better report, respond, prevent crime.
We also provided historic levels of funding to public safety in local communities that is delivering results. We're seeing near—a near 50-year low in violent crime in America. According to the Justice Department, hate crimes targeting Asian Americans fell by 33 percent from 2021 to 2022.
And because of his ridiculous, insane and very stupid policies, people are coming in and they're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen. We call it migrant crime. I call it Biden migrant crime. They're killing our citizens at a level that we've never seen before. And you're reading it, like these three incredible young girls over the last few days.
Number three, the crimes that you are still charged with. And think of all the civil penalties you have. How many billions of dollars do you owe in civil penalties for molesting a woman in public, for doing a whole range of things, of having sex with a porn star on the night – and while your wife was pregnant?
Look, he lied about how great he was on crime. I had to remind him that he oversaw a record increase of murder rates in 2020. And, on my watch, violent crime has hit a 50-year low. There's more to do, but it's a 50-year low.
When I've thought about his 34 felony convictions, his sexual assault on a woman in a public place, his being fined $400 million for business fraud, I thought to myself, "Donald Trump isn't just a convicted felon. Donald Trump is a one-man crime wave." And he's got more trials—he's got more trials coming up.
In America, they're safer today than when we were under Donald Trump. Trump continues to lie about crime in America, like everything else. Guess what? On his watch, the murder rate went up 30 percent, the biggest increase in history.
Meanwhile, we made the largest investment—Kamala and I—in public safety ever. Now the murder rate is falling faster than any time in history. Violent crime has dropped to the lowest level in more than 50 years, and crime will keep coming down when we put a prosecutor in the Oval Office instead of a convicted felon.
Look, I also want to thank the United States Senate for voting 94 to 1 to pass the COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act to protect Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. You acted decisively. And you can see on television the viciousness of the hate crimes we've seen over the past year—this past year and for too long. I urge the House to do the same and send that legislation to my desk, which I will gladly, anxiously sign.
One of them is banning so-called "ghost guns." These are homemade guns built from a kit that includes directions on how to finish the firearm. The parts have no serial numbers, so they show up at crime scenes, and they can't be traced. The buyers of these ghost gun kits aren't required to pass any background check. Anyone, from a criminal or terrorist, could buy this kit and, within 30 minutes, have a weapon that's lethal. But no more.
The President. Now, I'm not being a wise guy. There's no reason you should—have you seen my gun violence legislation I've introduced? As you know—because you're so involved—actually, crime is down; gun violence and murder rates are up. Guns. I'm the only guy that ever got passed legislation, when I was a Senator, that made sure we eliminated assault weapons. The idea you need a weapon that can have the ability to fire 20, 30, 40, 50, 120 shots from that weapon—whether it's a 9-millimeter pistol or whether it's a rifle—is ridiculous.
And when we did that, violent crime went down. All the criticism about the original crime bill—well, guess what? Crime went down until we stopped doing community policing. So it's about getting—we have availability now of over a billion—lots of money for cops to be able to hire psychologists, psychiatrists, as well as social workers to be engaged in the process.
Number three, when people are in fact in jail, they should be getting—if that's not the main crime, but they also did—they should be getting treatment while they are in jail.
Fourth, when people get out of jail—whether it's for drug addiction or any other crime—if they've served their time, they should have full access to everything from Pell grants, to public housing, to the like.
Our team is still compiling their report, but we do know that as our troops approached to capture the terrorist, in a final act of desperate cowardice, he—with no regard to the lives of his own family or others in the building, he chose to blow himself up—not just with a vest, but to blow up that third floor rather than face justice for the crimes he has committed, taking several members of his family with him just as his predecessor did.
This budget invests in funding for agencies like the FBI and U.S. Marshals and the Drug Enforcement Agency, but it also includes funding for COPS programs to increase community policing and the ability of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms tackle—to tackle gun crime. And it funds entirely new community violence intervention programs just at the Department of Justice.
Community violence interruption programs are programs where trusted community members work directly with the people who are most likely to commit or become victims of gun crimes. I had a chance to meet with those leaders in one of the programs in New York City not long ago. And I saw the difference they were making every day. We know these programs can dramatically reduce violence, and we're going to fund a lot more of them.
This bill also includes grants for State and local law enforcement and crime prevention programs. We're talking about drug treatment programs, school violence prevention programs, programs where people who might end up in prison and instead get mandatory mental health care that they need. Part of the safety—before any crime was committed.
The budget puts more police on the street for community policing so they get to know the community they're policing; allows the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms and the FBI to hire the agents they need to help fight gun crime and other violent crimes in our communities; and funds body cameras and makes sure police work with our local communities and are accountable to these communities.
It funds crime prevention and community violence intervention, drug treatment, mental health, criminal justice reform, and reentry for people coming home after incarceration. All demonstrable ways to reduce crime—and proven ways.
There's a—and it all works. If you see these community intervention programs, they work. They actually reduce crime. They significantly reduce crime. So that's a big piece of it.
We see on the news every single day the atrocities and the war crimes that are being committed by Russian forces in Ukraine, directed by Vladimir Putin. And it really is gut-wrenching. We see the incredible bravery of the Ukrainian fighters defending their country from—with everything they have. And by the way, it's not just their warriors. It's not just their military. It's people in the street—people in the street—staying behind. A lot have gotten out—5 million—but a lot are staying, including women as well as men, staying to fight for their country.
And we know that the United States is leading our allies and partners around the world to make sure the courageous Ukrainians who are fighting for the future of their nation have the weapons and the capacity and ammunition and equipment to defend themselves against Putin's brutal war. A lot of war crimes being committed.
And I know we can do this together. I really mean it. We can do this together. Last year, with Susan here at the White House, I signed a bipartisan COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act that included provisions named after Heather that are going to help State and local law enforcement better identify and respond to hate crimes.
And I'm going to say it again: I am not going to stop till we ban assault weapons. We have to ban assault weapons. I mean it. We did it once before. And when we did, mass crimes plummeted.
Let me close where I started: by thanking all of you and two people in particular, Rana and—Sodhi is a brother of Balbir Singh Sodhi, one of the first American victims of post-9/11 hate crimes. On this day in 2001, with Ground Zero smoldering, he was targeted, shot, and killed at work in Arizona by a White supremacist. To honor his memory, last year during the Asian American History Month here at the White House, we displayed the turban he used to wear with pride.
And another thing that we know is that voters spoke clearly about their concerns—about raising costs—the rising costs that they're—and the need to get inflation down. There are still a lot of people hurting that are very concerned. And it's about crime and public safety. And they sent a clear and unmistakable message that they want to preserve our democracy and protect the right to choose in this country.
We're also working to hold Russia accountable, including efforts in Congress that will make it easier to seek justice for Russia's war crimes in Ukraine.
Many cities from Newark, New Jersey; to Baton Rouge, Louisiana—[laughter]—but all kidding aside—have made major investments in community violence intervention initiatives. These studies have shown, in some cases, they can reduce violent crime up to 60 percent, particularly among our youth. It doesn't always do that much, but it can do that—that much.
But as you mayors know better than most, when you see these problems of crime and the opioid epidemic, you know that a big part of that is mental health—mental health. And I want to take a moment to talk to you about how we're addressing that as well.
And so, folks, look, MAGA Republicans are calling for defunding the police departments and defunding the FBI now. That's a good one. I like that one. [Laughter] Well, guess what? And they refuse to provide funding that is going to keep communities safe and secure. We talk about—about crime.
When we did that in the Biden crime bill, crime—just plummeted, because they know folks.
And guess what? Violent crime dropped because she could pick up the phone and call and say: "They're outside. I can hear them. They're talking about this is what they're going to do." Cops need help.
Together with our G-7 partners, we're imposing significant costs on Russia as well, denying Russia critical inputs for its war machine. We're independently holding Russia accountable for the war crimes and crimes against humanity that Russia is committing and continues to commit as I speak today. And Canada and America alike have opened their arms to Ukrainian refugees.
