Allies across the board are stepping up, increasing defense spending. A majority of them are on track for the first time to exceed our 2 percent of GDP commitment that they made. They agreed to spend 2 percent of the GDP on defense.
We will review the NATO 2030 agenda, an ambitious agenda for the future of NATO. And to do all this, we need to invest more. And that's exactly what we're doing with 7 consecutive years of increased defense spending: 260 billion extra U.S. dollars across Europe and Canada.
We have a long tradition of extensive military cooperation with NATO, including all missions. And we are right now ramping up our defense spending, and we will reach 2 percent of GDP as soon as practically possible.
And we will agree a comprehensive assistance package for Ukraine. And then I also welcome the fact that we are able now to state that actually, that European allies and Canada are stepping up with more troops, higher readiness, and also increased defense spending. New figures shows that they have added 350 billion extra U.S. dollars for defense since we made the pledge back in 2014.
Allies across the board are stepping up, increasing defense spending. A majority of them are on track for the first time to exceed our 2 percent of GDP commitment that they made. They agreed to spend 2 percent of the GDP on defense.
And that is why we're stepping up in terms of our defense spending. We're going to be moving to 3 percent of GDP on defense spending. And that's why we want to work more closely with the United States, especially on energy security, on our economic security, but also in reaching out to fellow democracies around the world to make sure that democracies prevail and we protect the freedom and future of our citizens.
We're modernizing our military alliance, building on Japan's historic increase in defense spending and new national security strategy.
And you may have—we had somewhat of a debate in the State of the Union. And—but I was glad to see everybody says we're not going to cut Social Security and Medicare. I noticed that happened, but I hope that's true. But that's what we—anyway, look, one of the things that we're going to have to focus on is that we want to take—it sounds like there is some discussion to take defense spending off the table, so we can't discuss that. And if you do that, you'll have to cut nothing much but programs. But you know, we can cut an awful lot by just doing what we already passed.
And you've driven historic changes at home and, you know, increasing defense spending and diversifying away from Russian energy sources. I know that's not been easy. Been very difficult for you.
Here's what the Speaker put forward in the Republican proposal. He wants to cut 22 percent of everything that isn't defense spending, Social Security, or Medicare, which I basically never thought would happen—negotiated they wouldn't touch in the State of the Union message. [Laughter] Anyway.
Q. Mr. President, on defense, on defense spending, some of the—some Republicans are saying that this deal does not raise—does not give the Pentagon enough money. Can you guarantee that America's fighting force is going to have what it needs for the next couple years?
And I think it's right that other countries also step up and do their part. We're lucky to have America's investment in European security, but we need to share the burden alongside you, which is why defense spending in the U.K. has—was—been above the 2 percent NATO benchmark. It's on an increasing trajectory, and we would encourage other countries to follow the lead that the U.S. and the U.K. set, because our security is collective.
Russia's aggression against Ukraine clearly demonstrated that the United States is and should remain the security leader. But other allies must take more responsibility for the security of the alliance as a whole. That is why I believe it's necessary for all NATO countries to increase their defense spending from 2 to 3 percent of GDP. Two percent was good 10 years ago. Now 3 percent is required in response to the full-scale war launched by Russia right beyond NATO's eastern border.
And today we are able to publish new figures for defense spending. They show that, across Europe and Canada, NATO allies are, this year, increasing defense spending by 18 percent. That's the biggest increase in decades. And 23 allies are going to spend 2 percent of GDP or more on defense this year. That's more than twice as many as 4 years ago and demonstrates that European allies and Canada are really stepping up and taking their share of the common responsibility to protect all of us in the NATO alliance.
Allies across the board are stepping up, increasing defense spending. A majority of them are on track for the first time to exceed our 2 percent of GDP commitment that they made. They agreed to spend 2 percent of the GDP on defense.
We're modernizing our military alliance, building on Japan's historic increase in defense spending and new national security strategy.
