We built the Interstate Highway System. We invested to win the space race. We were among the first to provide access to free education, beginning back in the late 1800s. These decisions to invest in our country and our families were a major reason why we were able to lead the world for much of the last century.
And we have to invest in our greatest asset as well: our people. For example, we used to lead the world in educational achievement. Now, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ranks America 35 out of 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education and care. We can't be competitive in the 21st-century global economy if we continue to slide.
Hey, folks, how are you all? I'm going to talk about more than just the NEA today because—and I want to—I've told your president I want to come back and just talk pure education as well. But I want to talk a little—much broader. And, Becky, thanks for hosting us. I appreciate it very much.
We're going to make sure there's a lot of things. For example, all the studies show that—and there was a major study done between—I think it was Harvard and Stanford about—about early education.
But imagine—you know, what they do, they open up a new enterprise. They'd hire—they'd educate their employees that they hired. They'd put them through the education they needed to be able to deal with the problem.
Well, you know, it seemed—and I—so I met with the Business Roundtable as well. I said, "What do you guys think?" They said, "Well"—they kind of—everyone nodded their heads and said, "Yes, yes, we should be educating." Not we, corporations—we, the country, should be educating—investing more in education.
Folks, I've talked enough. And I just want you to know that our Republican colleagues, they have a fundamentally different view of what they should do for this country. They have a fundamentally different view on what constitutes fair taxes, a fundamentally different view on what education should look like in America, a fundamentally different view on who should be paid what and whether or not the union movement is an asset or a liability, a fundamentally different view on American education and what we should be spending money on.
It's been a rough 4 or 5 years for hard-working Americans. For a lot of families, things are still tough. When things like this happened when I was growing up—we weren't poor. My dad—his greatest regret: He didn't have a college education, but he was a sophisticated man who read well, and he was really informed. But we lived in a three-bedroom home with—a split-level home in a new development with four kids and a grandpop and mom and dad. So it wasn't—but when—so when prices went up, it affected us. We had discussions at the kitchen table. I mean, for real. We weren't poor, but we knew what it was like.
And right now think about it. Look what we're doing on education for our kids. One of the reasons I came up with that $5.6 billion for HBCUs is, we've got to make sure they have the same laboratories, the same research capacities as everybody else has, because they can do anything anybody else can do. They just don't have——
The President. And, folks, one of the reasons why we led the world for so long, we were the first nation in the world to provide universal education, grades 1 through 12. Well, if anybody think if we were doing it for the first time now in the 20—21st century—going into the 20th—from the 20th century going into the second quarter of the 21st century, that we'd say 12 years is enough, do you think 12 years is enough going into 2030, '40, '50?
I don't think so. That's why we should have free early education at age 3. And that's why we should have 2 years of community college free. It makes—these things make us stronger.
But you know, the fact is that we're also in a circumstance where there's a lot that we can do in the meantime to make sure that there's an access to good education across the board. And that is by doing things that relate to starting education at age 3—formal schooling at age 3—which it increases—not daycare, but school. All the studies over 10 years show that that increases the prospect of someone making it through 12 years without any difficulty, no matter what the background they come from, by 56 percent.
And I also think that we should be making sure that we have the ability to provide for 2 years of education beyond that, whether it's apprenticeships or community colleges. And we also are in a situation where I think that—for example, I want to make sure we—a lot of it has to do with finances as well—that we make sure that we have help for people who come from modest means to be able to get to school.
You know, the cost of college education has increased fourfold. And it used to be that a Pell grant would cover something like 70 percent of the college tuition. Now it covers significantly less than that. So I want to increase the Pell grants as well.
Restoring the dignity of work means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class. You know, when we made public education—12 years of it—universal in the last century, we made the best educated, best paid—we became the best education, best paid nation in the world.
Folks, we all know 12 years of education is not enough to win the economic competition of the 21st century. If we want to have the best educated workforce, let's finish the job by providing access to preschool for 3 and 4 years old. Studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50-percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2- or 4-year degree, no matter their background they came from.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
I said, "I come from a State of DuPont. More corporations incorporated in my State than every other State in America combined. And the day—and they were the eighth largest corporation when I got elected. Eighth. And guess what? When they bought a new enterprise, they trained their workers. You guys don't spend any money training your workers. You expect the government to do it. So why in the hell are you against my effort to increase education funding?" And they all looked at me like, "Hmm, never quite thought of that."
Mental health concerns are higher today than they've ever been in history of America. Look what's happening. Third graders are 7 to 18 months behind in their education. Across the board, schools, teachers—look, these guys wanted to cut 100,000 teachers in the negotiation that happened—100,000 teachers. Try being a teacher in a classroom.
The last thing I think I'd like to mention to you is education. You know, my wife has an expression. And my wife never—she never talked to a group of more than the size of her school ever. And now she's out talking to 8-, 10,000 people sometimes, because she's so committed.
And what's really even hurt education more is the pandemic. It's had a profound impact on the mental health of our children but also the loss of 6 months—the loss of 3 months in school is equivalent to losing a year and a half of education. All this data shows this is real.
And so I think we have to invest more in education. Rather than just having daycare centers, I think we should have pre-K at 3 years old.
And one other thing it means. It means if they passed away, their children are entitled to the education benefits and the other benefits they would have been if he'd been alive and come home—they'd been alive and come home. So, folks, look, the same way, as I said, with Agent Orange.
Imagine what we could do—from everything from the deficit to taking care of kids, education, so many—I see a future where we save the planet from the climate crisis and our country from gun violence.
We also affirmed the science and education ties between Japan and the United States. Those tries—ties stretch up to the Moon, where two Japanese astronauts will join future American missions, and one will become the first non-American ever to land on the Moon.
And, by the way, the other thing is we're in a situation where I talk about education for black communities. I've raised the number, the amount of money for Pell grants by other $8,000 for anybody making under $70,000 a year, are going to be able to get $15,000 towards their tuition.
We're going to protect our children and get the weapons of war off our streets. We're going to provide clean drinking water, affordable high-speed internet, quality education for every child in America. We're going to secure our border and protect legal immigration.
In this Project 2024, Trump's—2025, Trump's deal—you know, he talks about education. HBCUs are as good as any other university. Guess what the problem is? [Applause] No, I'm serious. Not a joke.
THE PRESIDENT: Look, take a look at what's your, your bottom line is in your economy now. Take a look how those unemployment’s the lowest it’s been there. Take a look at how many of you, you, the new jobs are created. Take a look at how many people are been able to get to college education and get the debt wiped out. Take a look at what's actually happening on the ground. Take a look at the fight that's going on.
And so it's about giving healthcare. It's about making sure there's opportunity for people to have a good education. We should be—I've been pushing and we're going to get it done—early education. You know—you know all the studies better than I, as well as I do, that you come out of a neighborhood or a sc—a house where there's no books, where there's a, a dysfunctional family, where there's a problem—and you start off school, you hear million fewer words haven't been spoken because not, there's not conversation. Well, guess what? The studies show now, if you have three, four and five year olds going to early education, not, not daycare—education, you increase by 56% their ability to go through 12 years of school and on to Community College. And I'm gonna make Community College free. There's so many opportunities we have, and I think the community is beginning to see it. At least I hope so.
And how—how—can we be the greatest nation in the world without the best education system in the world?
She currently leads one of the nation's top civil rights organizations, where she promotes greater equity in voting rights, in our education system, our housing system, our justice system, and so much more.

Q. Good. My question is regarding education.
So we're also—I've committed to spend a billion dollars on public education to help people figure out how they can get in there. That's why we're also trying to set up mass vaccination centers, like places in stadiums and the like.
So it's about education. I'd love to talk to you more about it, because it's the answer, in my view—that and education—actually, access to education.
The President. I will not make that happen. It depends on whether or not you go to a private university or public university. It depends on the idea that I say to a community, "I'm going to forgive the debt"—the billions of dollars in debt for people who have gone to Harvard and Yale and Penn and schools my children—I went to a great school. I went to a State school. But is that going to be forgiven, rather than use that money to provide for early education for young children who are—come from disadvantaged circumstances?
I also set a goal, before I took office, of getting a majority of schools in K through 8 fully open in the first 100 days. Now, thanks to the enormous amount of work done by our administration, educators, parents, local, State education officials and leaders, a recent Department of Education Department survey shows that nearly half of the K-through-8 schools are open now full time, 5 days a week, for in-person learning. Not yet a majority, but we're really close. And I believe, in the 35 days left to go, we'll meet that goal as well.
First is access to a good education. When this Nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best educated, best prepared Nation in the world. It's, I believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century.
But the world has caught up, or catching up. They are not waiting. I would say, parenthetically: If we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, "Okay, we're going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education," I wonder whether we'd think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. I doubt it. Twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. That's why my American Families Plan guarantees 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting as early as we can.
The President. By being engaged in a whole range of programs. We talked today—everything from mental health programs to engaging people early on and letting them know there is other options. Making sure that when a child is young, they have access to a real education, and they get started off on the right foot.
Here's the thing for me: You talked about people—and this is important for people who look like me. My grandmother would sit around when I was a kid, fifth grade—had a fifth-grade education. I learned that she couldn't read when I was doing my homework. And she would tell me stories about people asking her to count the number of jellybeans in the jar or the soap.
And look, we believe 12 years of education is not enough to compete in the 21st-century economy. That's why I want to make 2-year community college available to every single American. We can afford to do this.
The President. No, but—no, but I'm not doing this to get—I just want to make it clear to you. [Laughter] Here's the deal: They made over $40 billion. If they just paid a minimum tax of 15 percent, they'd raise the dollars—all we need to do all this education we're talking about here.
You know, look, Terry worked with Republicans to invest in education, transportation, and workforce development. And by the way, Virginia has a whole bunch of veterans and Active Duty military members, more than almost any State. And guess what? The American Rescue Plan marked one of the biggest investments in veterans' health in a long, long time. It will upgrade VA hospitals that are 50 years old, reduce the shortages of doctors and nurses.
... and the systematic inequities in this country. We hope that this is not cut from the package, but if it is, what can you do to ensure that all Americans can get the education that they need to face these issues?
You have the vast majority of the 37 major countries in the world, economies, we rank 35 in our investment in education.
We're in a situation where, if you -- if you think about it, when we -- what caused us to move ahead and dominate the 20th century, in the late 1900s -- early 1900s, late 1890s, we came up with, said, 12 years of free education. That was revolutionary at the time. I mean, seriously.
Now, if we were sitting down today and saying, "Oh, we've got to put together an education system," raise your hand if anybody thinks 12 years is enough to compete in the 21st century.
providing college -- I mean, providing professional education beyond 12 years. We rank like -- I think it's -- don't hold me to the number. I think it's 16 or 17 in the world, the United States of America, for God's sake.
Q. Thank you for taking my question, Mr. President. We've heard in the news that the proposal for 2 years of free community college may be cut from your economic package. An educated citizenry is absolutely crucial to solving complex problems like climate change and the systematic inequities in this country. We hope that this is not cut from the package, but if it is, what can you do to ensure that all Americans can get the education that they need to face these issues?
You have the vast majority—of the 37 major countries in the world—economies—we rank 35 in our investment in education. We're in a situation where if you think about it, when we—what caused us to move ahead and dominate the 20th century: In the late 1900s—in the early 1900s, late 1890s, we came up—we said, 12 years of free education. That was revolutionary at the time. I mean, seriously.
Now, if we were sitting down today and saying, "Oh, we've got to put together an education system," raise your hand if anybody thinks 12 years is enough to compete in the 21st century? So that's why what I propose is: free child—free school—free school for every 3- and 4-year-old in America, no matter what their background.
The President. No, look, it really makes a gigantic difference. And think of this: You have more countries in the world with—having—providing college—I mean, providing professional education beyond 12 years. We rank like, I think it's—don't hold me to the number—I think it's 16 or 17 in the world—the United States of America, for God's sake.
You know, one of the things that I remember—and I'll end this with—I was talking with, you know, Jim Clyburn, who was a great help to me in the campaign in South Carolina. And Jim said—and when he would endorse me—and there was a clip on television the last couple days of Jim. And it said that we want to make things accessible and affordable for all Americans. That's health care, that's education, that's prescription drugs, that's making sure you have access—access—to all the things that everybody else has. We can afford to do that. We can't afford not to do it.
The President. No, I don't think so. When you say "more realistic," I think it's extremely realistic to say to people, because—let me back up. You all really know the politics in this country, and your networks and others. You've spent a lot of time, which I'm glad you do, polling this data, determining where the—what the American people's attitudes are, et cetera. The American people overwhelmingly agree with me on prescription drugs. They overwhelmingly agree with me on the cost of education. They overwhelmingly agree with me on early education. They overwhelmingly—and go on the list—on childcare.
Q. And on Omicron and education, teachers are in result in some—in revolt in so many places. Parents are at odds over closing schools and remote learning. You say we're not going to go back to closing schools—you said that just moments ago—yet they're closing in some areas. What do you say to those teachers and principals and parents about school closings? And what can your administration do to help make up for learning loss for students?
Number two, I know that the two people who've opposed, on the Democratic side at least, support a number of the things that are in there. For example, Joe Manchin strongly supports early education, 3 and 4 years of age. Strongly supports that. There is strong support for, I think, a number of the way in which to pay for these—pay for this proposal.
If you get to trade off higher gas as—you're putting up with a higher price of hamburgers and gas, versus whether or not you're going to have to—you're going to be able to pay for education and/or childcare and the like, I think most people would make the trade. Their bottom line would be better in middle class households.
And on education, today, about half of the 3- and 4-year-olds are enrolled in early childhood education. In Germany, France, U.K., Latvia, the number is more than 90 percent. Where the hell are—heck are we? [Laughter] No, I'm serious. We're falling further and further behind the curve. But we can fix that problem. We can do this and more on health care, nutrition, and a host of other issues.
And I know that the education funds helped many of you stay open, keep your schools open, and keep them open safely. There's a lot of money you have there for everything from dealing with ventilation to clean buses—school buses and everything in between. There's no reason why we can't keep our schools open, in my view.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
And you know, it's amazing what you all do. I really mean it. I'm not being solicitous. After a year of disruption for our kids, we were able to add education jobs in 2021, more than—more than any other year on record. You got county law enforcement officers and first responders back on the job so ambulances could arrive on time and communities could be kept safe.
Second, let's take on mental health—especially among our children, whose lives and education have been turned upside down. The American Rescue Plan gave schools money to hire teachers and help students make up for lost learning. I urge every parent to make sure your school does just that. They have the money. We can all play a part. Sign up to be a tutor or a mentor. Children were also struggling before the pandemic: bullying, violence, trauma, and the harms of social media.
During my State of the Union Address, I announced what I called a unity agenda that brings the country together to address the big challenges we face. And one of those included ending the opioid epidemic and addressing the mental health crisis. So many, young and old, because of this pandemic, need help. And having a problem—a mental problem—is no different that breaking your arm or your leg. You need invest in systems that provide adequate health care, counseling drug treatment, prevention, housing, education, and other social services to those that need it most.
Right now, in most places, you serve your time in prison, you get a bus ticket and 25 bucks, and you end up under the same bridge you got arrested under the first time. They should have access to education and housing. Give them a chance to move beyond where they were.
That's why, 1 year ago, with the help of many of you, I signed into law the bipartisan COVID-19 Hate Crimes Act. And with your continued help—[applause]—no, with your continued help—our commitment to advance equality across the board in everything from health care, to education, to housing, to LGBTQ rights.
Hey, folks, how are you all? I'm going to talk about more than just the NEA today because—and I want to—I've told your president I want to come back and just talk pure education as well. But I want to talk a little—much broader. And, Becky, thanks for hosting us. I appreciate it very much.
And here's the deal: And those who lost someone, they died as a consequence of this, they should be entitled to the compensation for their families and life insurance, health—I mean, excuse me, educational help that that soldier would have been able to get for his children.
But you know, the fact is that we're also in a circumstance where there's a lot that we can do in the meantime to make sure that there's an access to good education across the board. And that is by doing things that relate to starting education at age 3—formal schooling at age 3—which it increases—not daycare, but school. All the studies over 10 years show that that increases the prospect of someone making it through 12 years without any difficulty, no matter what the background they come from, by 56 percent.
And I also think that we should be making sure that we have the ability to provide for 2 years of education beyond that, whether it's apprenticeships or community colleges. And we also are in a situation where I think that—for example, I want to make sure we—a lot of it has to do with finances as well—that we make sure that we have help for people who come from modest means to be able to get to school.
You know, the cost of college education has increased fourfold. And it used to be that a Pell grant would cover something like 70 percent of the college tuition. Now it covers significantly less than that. So I want to increase the Pell grants as well.
Folks, look, speaking of education, instead of photo ops—and I know I spend a lot of time—some here from Delaware know I'm a big Delaware State guy. I went to the University of Delaware, but my political foundation is Delaware State College, HBCU.
What are the things that make it grow? Well, first of all, let me—I could go on, but I'm just going to give you one example. We're in a situation where, if you were a—one of the reasons why America became the most advanced and economically prosperous nation in the 21st century: We're the first nation in the world have a universal education system—grades 1 through 12. Now, others had systems that were superior to ours, in terms of their exclusiveness, but not universal.
Now, I wonder if anybody—if today we were starting off and saying, "Oh, we're going to decide—we decide we're going to have to have a universal education system," would anybody think, in the second quarter of the 21st century, that 12 years was enough to compete?
So a lot of you are doing a lot of experimental work, in terms of not just pre-K, but you're doing it in terms of education—teaching kids to read, write, add, and subtract at 3 and 4 and 5 years old, and not—and you're focusing on apprentice programs after college.
But when, you know, there were shop classes in school where people learned whether they could—if they're comfortable working with their hands, whether they—so there's a lot of things that we can do in education.
And a lot of folks are in a situation where if they just had somebody to talk to, they just had—and that's why I think some of the things we can do that can also help families going through some really difficult times is, for example, a preschool education. Reading, writing, arithmetic—age 3.
Restoring the dignity of work means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class. You know, when we made public education—12 years of it—universal in the last century, we made the best educated, best paid—we became the best education, best paid nation in the world.
Folks, we all know 12 years of education is not enough to win the economic competition of the 21st century. If we want to have the best educated workforce, let's finish the job by providing access to preschool for 3 and 4 years old. Studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50-percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2- or 4-year degree, no matter their background they came from.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
Speaking of education, instead of a photo ops, we're delivering nearly $6 billion—I promised we would do—$6 billion for—to HBCUs. Without the kind of foundations that other schools have, we've got to make sure they have the same laboratories, the same research capacities as everybody else. Because their students can do anything anybody else can do, but they need to have the facility to do it.
For decades, we were the—not only—we were the only country in the world—we led the world economically. We were the only economy in the world that was moving that fast because we had the best educated public in the world. We started before any other country—other had—higher education was more sophisticated and a lot of private institutions. But we—everybody in America at the turn of the nine—the 20th century said—that we could go to school for free 12 years. It was a gamechanger. It was a gamechanger.
MAGA Republicans—you know, they don't want things that particularly are going to help working families—like health care, education, public safety—which are going to raise costs on folks. Look, MAGA Republicans also refuse to raise a single penny in new taxes on the wealthiest people.
You know, Henrietta as a teacher, a scholar, and a leader, she's dedicated her career to Native American education and to establishing the field of Native American studies.
She has strengthened American education, advanced American scholarship, and enriched the lives of students of all ages and the future of our Nation.
Over time, the committee evolved from volunteers representing individual cases to full-time lawyers leading broader high-impact—high-impact litigation, voting rights, employment, education, housing, and so much more.
Today, you understand civil rights is the unfinished fight of America, and you're leading the fight for them after having led the fight for the past 60 years. You've been critical partners to this administration. You're helping us bring and protect the right to vote, to chart news pathways to further equal opportunity in higher education, protecting the value of diversity and full inclusion of all Americans in the promise of America. That's what it's all about.
The CBC has always been a conscience of our country, a truthteller. Truths about where we have been and where we must go. Tonight let us continue to speak truth. Across America there is a full-on attack on many of the hard-fought, hard-won freedoms that the CBC has achieved: the freedom to vote; to teach America's full history; to address inequity and diversity; to love who you love; to access education, health care, and economic opportunity; and the freedom of a woman to make decisions about her own body.
And we stand with the CBC to reduce disparities in jobs, health care, and education, working hand in hand to close the racial wealth gap and staying committed to Black America's prosperity.
The President. Well, what the hell am I doing here then? [Laughter] You're—[laughter]—Jill enjoys traveling to your States and—to advance priorities like education and workforce development.

To remain the strongest economy in the world, we need to have the best education system in the world. And I, like I suspect all of you, want to give a child—every child a good start by providing access to preschool for 3- and 4-years-old.
I met a year and a half ago with the leaders of the Business Roundtable. They were mad that I was ever—angry—I—well, they were discussing—[laughter]—why I wanted to spend money on education.
A fair Tax Code is how we invest in things that make this country great: health care, education, defense, and so much more.
And now we have among the lowest inflation rates of any country in America [the world; White House correction], and still—we're still fighting to lower it even further. We're fighting to lower health care costs, education costs to give just a little more breathing room, as my dad would say, to ordinary families like the one I grew up in.
We're also making college more affordable by relieving student debt for millions of borrowers, including many in this community. [Applause] That's worth clapping for, I promise you. How we can be the leader of the world without having the best education in the world, I don't understand.
And, by the way, the other thing is we're in a situation where I talk about education for black communities. I've raised the number, the amount of money for Pell grants by other $8,000 for anybody making under $70,000 a year, are going to be able to get $15,000 towards their tuition.
We're going to protect our children and get the weapons of war off our streets. We're going to provide clean drinking water, affordable high-speed internet, quality education for every child in America. We're going to secure our border and protect legal immigration.
In fact, earlier today Jill and I visited Stonewall Inn to unveil the new visitor center, the country's first ever within the National Park system to honor the LGBTQ community. This Senator—this center will be a source of education, art, and inspiration that preserves how history and legacy of Stonewall Uprising has been preserved. And it signifies the legacy of the leadership of the LGBT community, especially trans women of color, who, for generations, have been at the forefront of helping realize the promise of America for all Americans.

In this Project 2024, Trump's—2025, Trump's deal—you know, he talks about education. HBCUs are as good as any other university. Guess what the problem is? [Applause] No, I'm serious. Not a joke.
Governor Josh Shapiro and I were together with the President in Pennsylvania to talk about what we need to do to implement our policy of, in the next 9 years now, removing all lead pipes and service lines in our Nation, which has the benefit of not only allowing the work to happen—which means supporting the workers who do that—but also understanding the direct impact to public health and public education, in that, of course, the toxic water coming through those lead pipes has a direct impact on the ability of our children to learn.
But to make sure everyone is part of this resurgence, we need to build on what we know widens the path to the middle class—and you all know what it is, access to education.

Folks, the source of our economic power and middle class strength in the 20th Century was the fact that we were among the first major nations in the world to provide twelve years of free education for our citizens.

Consider that by the end of the decade, two out of three of all jobs will require an education beyond high school, from an 18-week certificate to a two-year associate's degree to a four-year bachelor's, or a PhD.

But today, the cost of higher education is too high for too many Americans. Too many folks are priced out of a piece of the middle-class dream.

It's a simple fact that community colleges are the most flexible educational institutions we have. I've traveled all over this country, from New York to Iowa to California, to see how community colleges create partnerships with Fortune 500 companies and local businesses to generate jobs; support apprenticeships with organized labor, and prepare hardworking students for good-paying jobs in the areas in which they live.

With an education system that trains our people for the best jobs of the 21st century, where cost doesn't prevent young people from going to college, and student debt doesn't crush them when they get out.
Jill is a mom, a military mom, an educator. She has dedicated her life to education. But teaching isn't just what she does. It's who she is. For American educators this is a great day for you all. You're going to have one of your own in the White House and Jill is going to make a great first lady. I'm so proud of her.
And this includes helping businesses, schools, and working families — from unemployment benefits to early education to continued access to affordable health care during the pandemic.

They all acknowledge that this will take a massive public education campaign.

And finally, while we focused on the immediate need to control the virus, we also talked about how to build back better — especially on infrastructure, education, and so much more.

An expert on labor economics, race, poverty, and education.

She's spent the past decade working to improve blighted neighborhoods and create safer, more affordable communities. She also understands where you live impacts your health, access to education, jobs, and economic opportunity.

That includes funding to keep educators on the job just like we did during the Recovery Act that saved 400,000 education jobs.

It also requires someone who understands the need to prevent the pandemic from further exacerbating the inequities in our education system that represent a compounding problem.

We need someone with the experience to help us build back better with the Biden-Harris education plan.

We need to make sure every child in this nation has access to a good education — regardless of their zip code, 0r regardless of their disability.

Under our legislative plan, we have a number of policies to provide affordable higher education and alleviate that financial burden.

The bottom line is we can achieve all of these critical things but we need someone who gets that education isn't just what we do as a nation.

And he understands the transformative power that comes from investing in public education.

In our conversations, Dr. Cardona talked about how public education was his great equalizer.

Public education that helped Miguel become the first in his family to go to college.

And with that preparation and grounding, Dr. Cardona has brought his heart, knowledge, and passion for education to bear on behalf of all students across Connecticut.

And it's the standard of care that comes from having taught in a classroom, and that comes from a hardworking family who found their way in America through public education.

That's why we will launch a massive public education campaign to increase vaccine acceptance.

She currently leads one of the nation's top civil rights organizations, where she promotes greater equity in voting rights, in our education system, our housing system, our justice system, and so much more.

Police officers. Firefighters. All first responders. Nurses. Educators. Over the last year, more than 600,000 education jobs have been lost in our cities and towns.

Our administration will launch a massive public education campaign to rebuild that trust.

Q. Good. My question is regarding education.
So we're also—I've committed to spend a billion dollars on public education to help people figure out how they can get in there. That's why we're also trying to set up mass vaccination centers, like places in stadiums and the like.
So it's about education. I'd love to talk to you more about it, because it's the answer, in my view—that and education—actually, access to education.
The President. I will not make that happen. It depends on whether or not you go to a private university or public university. It depends on the idea that I say to a community, "I'm going to forgive the debt"—the billions of dollars in debt for people who have gone to Harvard and Yale and Penn and schools my children—I went to a great school. I went to a State school. But is that going to be forgiven, rather than use that money to provide for early education for young children who are—come from disadvantaged circumstances?
And so, you know, we know how important early childhood education and a child's development is. And to get through this crisis, I think we need to be sure childcare providers have the funding they need to stay afloat.
And all—and these are all necessary steps to helping the economy rebuild. Necessary steps, not only—but not only steps; it's enough to build back to where we were before. We need to build back better. And we—I think we—all of us know how to do that. We remember what happened in the States back in 2008: Hundreds of thousands of jobs disappeared every month in that Great Recession. And we passed the Recovery Act. We provided State and local fiscal aid. We sent funding to your school districts to help save over 300,000 education jobs. We provided middle class tax relief. We invested in the future, rebuilding roads and bridges; making the biggest clean energy investment in history and the single biggest investment in infrastructure since Eisenhower's Interstate Highway program. And we created, in the process—you all created in the process over thousands—hundreds of thousands of good-paying jobs.
Women's participation in the workforce—you all know this—is driven to its lowest level in more than three decades. So many women are facing the devastating choice between a paycheck, and care and education of their child. Our cities and towns have shed 1.3 million jobs since just last March: educators, nurses, cops, firefighters, other essential workers.
Our educators are doing everything they can to protect and educate our students, despite the lack of resources and as districts face budget crises that risk education jobs.
And more than 400,000 businesses—mostly small businesses, many minority businesses—have been shuttered; cost of millions of jobs; 1.3 million public sector—education, nurses, cops, firefighters, essential workers—have lost their jobs.
I also set a goal, before I took office, of getting a majority of schools in K through 8 fully open in the first 100 days. Now, thanks to the enormous amount of work done by our administration, educators, parents, local, State education officials and leaders, a recent Department of Education Department survey shows that nearly half of the K-through-8 schools are open now full time, 5 days a week, for in-person learning. Not yet a majority, but we're really close. And I believe, in the 35 days left to go, we'll meet that goal as well.
First is access to a good education. When this Nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best educated, best prepared Nation in the world. It's, I believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century.
But the world has caught up, or catching up. They are not waiting. I would say, parenthetically: If we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, "Okay, we're going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education," I wonder whether we'd think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. I doubt it. Twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. That's why my American Families Plan guarantees 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting as early as we can.
THE PRESIDENT: No, I don't think the American people are racist, but I think after 400 years, African-Americans have been left in a position where they're so far behind the eight ball in terms of education, health, in terms of opportunity. I don't think America is racist, but I think the overhang from all of the Jim Crow and before that slavery have had a cost and we have to deal with it.
It all starts with access to a good education, as you all know. When America made 12 years of public education universal in America in the early 1900s, it made us the best educated nation in the world, and you saw the benefits that came from that. But the rest of the world has caught up to us. The rest of the world has caught up to us. They are not waiting. And 12 years is no longer enough to compete with the world in the 21st century and lead the 21st century.
That's why my American Families Plan guarantees 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting as early as we can.
We were at an elementary school earlier today. And what we're talking about here is—it means universal, high-quality preschool—for 3- and 4-year-olds—not daycare, preschool. And the research has shown, here at the great universities in this State and others, that children of that age who go to school, they are far more likely to graduate from high school and continue their education beyond that, rather than start off behind the eight ball if they come from families that are not—don't have educations—college educations.
I promise you—I promise you—America will be much stronger for it. Because, like I said, if we're setting out a universal education, it wouldn't just be 12 years anymore. It would be—it would be those 14 years—16 years I'm talking about: 2 to start, and 2 at the other end.
We also need to up our game in our education system. Twelve years of education in the 20—in 2021 is not enough to compete in the 21st century. In my view, we need 16 years of public education guaranteed in this country from preschool for 3- and 4-year-olds at the early end, to 2 years of community college after high school.
And we've recently made significant new investments around vaccine education, including funds to help states and community organizations get the word out on the local level.
Additionally, if teens are on the move this summer, they can get their first shot in one place and the second shot elsewhere. At the same time, we're also launching an important public education campaign. First and foremost, we're providing families with trusted medical information they need to make informed decisions about the vaccination and the vaccine.
And I'd also point out that I think what this shows is that—I think we have to make a greater investment in education as it relates to being able to train and graduate more people proficient in cybersecurity.
But my point is this, Jill has a constant refrain: "Joey, any nation that outeducates us is going to outcompete us." It's a simple proposition. You know, think about this: One of the reasons that caused us to move ahead so significantly as a world leader—an economic leader in the world was that in the late 1800s, early 1900s, we were the first nation in the world to say, "We're going to have 12 years of free—without any limitation—free education." Twelve years.
Now imagine if—and the rest of the world has caught up with us, and they've now passed us in many cases. Imagine if we were sitting today and say, "We're going to set up an education system." Does anybody think 12 years of education is enough for us to compete in the world in the second quarter of the 21st century? I'm not joking. Just consciously think about that. Is it enough? It's not.
And so I'm proposing 4 additional years of education: 2 years of high-quality pre-K for 3- and 4-years-old—not in daycare, in school. The studies show that if you do that, those children have an opportunity of 56 better—56-percent better chance of going through all 12 years of school and beyond without getting into any trouble, no matter what the background or the family they come from. No matter what. On the front end, those 2 years are important.
And by the way, if you'll hold for a second—think about this. How many of you men and women have children who were doing remote learning? Think of all the children throughout the country, in inner cities and in rural areas, that had no internet connection. It's estimated that some of those kids are going to be pushed—although it's only been 1 year—3 years behind in their education.
But they're not spending money to educate the workforce, so imagine what we'd do—corporate America benefits with a better educated population. Do you want to give the wealthiest people in America another tax cut? I don't—by the way, I don't begrudge them the money they've made, just start paying your fair share, just a little bit. In consequence, it would help every high school graduate earn an education like students here at Tri-C, one that puts people on a path to good-paying jobs in industries of the future.
Second, we're going to reduce [redouble]* our outreach and public education efforts. We're going to relaunch them, in effect. We're going to launch a national vaccination tour to encourage people to take the shot. The Vice President is going to lead that tour across the South and the Midwest, where we still have millions of people to vaccinate. She's going to be joined by Jill—by the First Lady and the Second Gentleman and Cabinet Secretaries along the way.
In fact, in May, State and local governments added 103,000 education jobs, returned them to work. These funds are continuing to get out this month to support State and local governments, which will help get more people back to work.
And I think that we have reason to believe that if we provide the policies that are consistent, that provide for the kind of growth and opportunity for them—and education plays a gigantic part of that—I think we—I think the future is very, very bright. I think we have an opportunity to do some, really, very good things.
The President. By being engaged in a whole range of programs. We talked today—everything from mental health programs to engaging people early on and letting them know there is other options. Making sure that when a child is young, they have access to a real education, and they get started off on the right foot.
But I'm getting to work with Congress right away on the other half of my economic agenda as well—the American Family Plan—to finish the job on childcare, education, the caring economy, clean energy tax cuts—clean energy, and tax cuts for American families and much more. For me, investment in our physical and human infrastructure are inextricably intertwined. Both make us better off and stronger.
Number two, I'm going to fight like heck to get them the rest of what I think has to be done. On education, for example, my proposal was, in the Family Plan, early education and free community college. I'm going to fight like the devil to get that done, but it's not going to be with Republican help. I'm going to have to get every Democrat and do it through reconciliation if it gets done. So that's number one.
The point is: A lot of transgender youth—those who commit suicide—based on the studies his foundation has done, do it because their mom doesn't understand, because mom or dad says, "You can't be here anymore"—are rejected. So, folks, we've got a lot of work to do. A lot of it's basically public education.
As of last spring, more than 82,000 children here in Wisconsin, which prides itself on its education, didn't have reliable internet access at home. Think about that year—in a year of remote schooling. When so many of our needs and our connections were forced to move online, tens of thousands of Wisconsin kids got left behind.
And—for example, including the public education piece; including the piece that is about encouraging the private sector, where appropriate, to be engaged around resilience and adaptation. On the issue of water policy, what kind of resources do you need that are also preventative as well as reactive to the wildfires themselves?
But this progress is testament to our commitment to grow this economy from the bottom up and the middle out. The American Rescue Plan provided resources to get shots in people's arms and checks in people's pockets. Schools—schools are struggling to reopen so we made vaccinating teachers a priority, getting schools much-needed support. In March, we've added—just in the month of [since]* March, we added 364,000 education jobs and roles. Small businesses and restaurants were getting crushed. Now we're delivering the loans and support they need to reopen and to stay open.
That's why I made it a priority to get educators vaccinated and reopen schools as quickly as possible. Nationwide, 84 percent of K-through-12 educators and school staff are fully vaccinated, and they were by the end of May. Even more have gotten the vaccination since—the vaccine since. But as I've said many times, it's not enough just to get back to normal. We have to build back better than ever, especially our education system.
My American Families Plan—which we're now trying to get done as well—calls for an historic investment in human infrastructure; guaranteeing 4 additional years of public education for everyone, starting as early as we can; universal high-quality preschool for 3- and 4-year-olds, and all the data shows how that increases their prospect, no matter what environment they come from, to do better and make it through school; 2 years of free community college; and high-quality, affordable childcare for working families.
My budget invests $20 billion more in title I schools. No student—no student's education should depend on their ZIP Code. It would represent a historic effort to close the funding gap between rich and poor districts. And one of the first things that funding will be used for is to help educators in those schools get the raises they deserve and the resources they need.
And by the way, if I'd note, this isn't just—it's not that I'm trying to be nice. This is absolutely necessary—necessary if we're going to compete in the 21st century. Think about it: The idea that we have a large portion of our student population living in ZIP Codes where they cannot afford the kind of education and can't pay the teachers enough in those schools to educate them, it makes no sense. The people that are going to benefit the most from this is corporate America and businesses because they're going to have a better educated public, better educated students.
Your union and teachers' protests across the country made it clear that you deserve more than praise. You deserve a raise, not just praise. And, folks, every parent in this country who spent the last year helping educate their children at home understand you deserve a raise. They figured it out. No, I'm serious. Think about it. Think about it. It was the ultimate education of the public going through this pandemic.
No, but let's—so let me close with this: On Sunday, we'll celebrate our independence as a Nation, as well as our progress against the virus. In the days ahead, we have a chance to make another beginning—the beginning of a stronger, fairer education system. But it can't be done—it can't be done with you. We can't do it alone. We need to keep getting the word out about the opportunities that lies ahead for us.
The Build Back Better plan—agenda starts with education. You know, one of the reasons why we were the leading country in the world for so long, and still on the edges, is because we're the first nation—industrial nation in the world to require—to allow 12 years of free education back at the turn of the 20th century. But everybody has caught up.
At the time, they were debating what should be education in America. The argument was there should be 12 years of free education. And that's what's got us ahead. That's what had us leap ahead of the rest of the world.
But as of today, everybody has caught up. Does anybody think, in the 21st century, with the change that's taking place in technology and across the board, that 12 years of education is enough to be able to live a middle class life? I don't think so. And so the fact of the matter is, we've decided—I've decided we should have a minimum of 14 years of education. Fourteen years of education—which I'll explain in a second.
That's why I want to guarantee an additional 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting with providing 2 years of universal, high-quality preschool for 3- and 4-year-olds, building on what the Governor has been doing here in Illinois.
I just toured your Children's Learning Center. It's an amazing resource. Students and faculty can have their children cared for. Students can earn their associate degrees in early childhood education as well. High-quality childcare options should be the rule, not the exception.
NOTE: The President spoke at 1:46 p.m. at McHenry County College. In his remarks, he referred to Edith Sanchez, student, McHenry County College, who introduced the President; Clint Gabbard, president, McHenry County College; Sen. Ronald H. Johnson; Mike Sayre, special education teacher, Central High School in Crystal Lake, IL; and former Secretary of Commerce Penny S. Pritzker. He also referred to his sister Valerie Biden Owens.
At least one in three businesses require their workers to sign a noncompete agreement. These aren't just high-paid executives or scientists who hold secret formulas for Coca-Cola so Pepsi can't get their hands on it. A recent study found one in five workers without a college education is subject to noncompete agreements. They're construction workers, hotel workers, disproportionately women and women of color.
But when I took office, I made a commitment—a commitment to the American people that we were going to change that paradigm so working families could have a fighting chance again to get a good education; to get a good job and a raise; to take care of the elderly parent or the child with the disability and still be able to go out and earn a good living; to stop losing hours of their lives stuck in traffic because the streets are crumbling; or waiting for slow, spotty internet to connect them to the world.
Here's the thing for me: You talked about people—and this is important for people who look like me. My grandmother would sit around when I was a kid, fifth grade—had a fifth-grade education. I learned that she couldn't read when I was doing my homework. And she would tell me stories about people asking her to count the number of jellybeans in the jar or the soap.
And look, we believe 12 years of education is not enough to compete in the 21st-century economy. That's why I want to make 2-year community college available to every single American. We can afford to do this.
The President. No, but—no, but I'm not doing this to get—I just want to make it clear to you. [Laughter] Here's the deal: They made over $40 billion. If they just paid a minimum tax of 15 percent, they'd raise the dollars—all we need to do all this education we're talking about here.
You know, look, Terry worked with Republicans to invest in education, transportation, and workforce development. And by the way, Virginia has a whole bunch of veterans and Active Duty military members, more than almost any State. And guess what? The American Rescue Plan marked one of the biggest investments in veterans' health in a long, long time. It will upgrade VA hospitals that are 50 years old, reduce the shortages of doctors and nurses.
Today, our relation is stronger than ever. Our partnership exists for economy, the environment, health, education, culture, and more. I'm looking forward to work with you, Mr. President, to bring our two countries more closer for benefit of Iraq and United States.
Think about it. If we were having the debate that was taking place in the United States in the late 1890s and the early 1900s about public education, do you think any of us would say 12 years of free public education was enough to compete in the 21st century? Not a joke. Think about it. What do you think? I don't think there's a shot if we were doing that today.
But when I put my hand on that Bible on January 20 and took the oath of office, I made a commitment to the American people: We're going to change the paradigm so working people could have a fighting chance again to get a good education, to get a good job and a raise, to take care of that elderly parent and afford to take care of their children, and stop losing hours of their lives stuck in traffic because the streets are crumbling or waiting for slow, spotty internet to connect them to the world.
Bringing down the costs—everyday costs that have been taking a bigger and bigger bite out of middle class families' incomes—the expenses that parents—that keep parents up at night and rob seniors of their dignity: health care, prescription drug costs, childcare, education, housing, or caring for an elderly relative or a loved one.
And the same time, it's true that long-term investments that bring down the biggest costs that families face—housing, childcare, education, and health care—these investments will lower out-of-pocket expenses, not raise them. They will spur more people to work by helping ease the burdens of childcare and senior care that parents, especially mothers, bear, keeping them out of the job market.
And I've said—as I've said before, if you aren't going to fight COVID-19, at least get out of the way of everyone else who is trying. You know, we're not going to sit by as Governors try to block and intimidate educators protecting our children. For example, if a Governor wants to cut the pay of a hard-working education leader who requires masks in the classroom, the money from the American Rescue Plan can be used to pay that person's salary, 100 percent.
And I'm pleased to see the private sector stepping up as well. In the last week, AT&amp;T, Amtrak, McDonalds, they all announced vaccine requirements. I recently met with a group of business and education leaders—from United Airlines, to Kaiser Permanente, to Howard University—who are also doing the same thing.
And what makes this team remarkable is, they don't just win games, they change lives: encouraging people to get vaccinated so we can beat this pandemic; speaking out and standing up for racial justice and voting rights; supporting education and membership programs for young people and—excuse me, mentorship programs for young people; and fighting to protect trans youth from an epidemic of violence and discrimination.
But guess what? They weren't paying for it. [Laughter] And guess what? Does anybody think if we were starting off from scratch, setting up public education, we'd say 12 years was enough for the 21st century?
I also want to thank Principal Richardson. I was kidding him. I was saying, "I—this school is really something else." And the way we talked about the interfacing of all the students and the social education that's taking place and how things are changing. And, Chancellor Ferebee, I told you, I think that's maybe the harder job than about anything I can think of. But thank you. You're doing a heck of a job.
And one of the things that I think is important for—and I'm trying to get people to focus on is: What is it you like? What do you think we—no, don't—forget a number. What do you think we should be doing? Is it appropriate, in your view, to cut taxes for working class people by providing for daycare, providing for early education, 3 and 4 years old? Is it appropriate to do something about free community college, or do you want to means test it? I'm telling them, "What are your priorities?"
For example, I think—from the Build Back Better program—it's required that we in fact have the best education available to us. And I'll be speaking to this in detail tomorrow.
But look, here's the situation: How can we, in an ever-competitive world, increasingly competitive world—how can we not meet the educational standards of—at least other countries are working toward? Nobody is reducing the number of years they want their children to go to school or people to go school.
We've invested in our people, in opportunity. We're among the first to provide access, for example, to free education. It's the reason why, in the 20th century, we began to take off. It was back in the late 1890s we decided, among the first countries, that we were going to be the first nation that every single American, regardless of their background—and it wasn't, at the time, regardless of their background, but based on income—would have free 12 years of education. We invested to win the space race. We led the world in research and development that led to the creation of the internet.
We're among the first in the world to guarantee access to universal education. Now, the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development ranks America 35th out of 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education as a percent of GDP.
Take education, for example. When America said everyone is entitled to 12 years of free public education—universal—a century ago, it gave us the best educated, best prepared workforce in the world. That was one of the reasons why America began to grow so rapidly. It's a big part of why we led the world the bulk of the 20th century.
But guess what? If we were going to put together a committee today, like they did in 1898—I think it was—and we were going to invent a public education system, is there any chance we'd say that we thought 12 years is enough in the 21st century? Just 12 years? I don't think so.
But right now we're lagging behind, while other countries are investing in their children. Today, only about half of 3- and 4-year-olds in America are enrolled in early childhood education. In Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Latvia, the number—that number is more than 90 percent. Ninety percent of their 3- and 4-year-olds.
We're falling further and further behind the curve. It's not just early education. According to one study, we rank 33 out of 44 advanced economies when it comes to the percentage of our young people who have attained a post-high school degree, anything after high school. We're at the bottom of the heap. I'll bet if I—if that was on a quiz—you were on one of these quiz shows, they ask you that, you would have said maybe we're two or three or four. It's ridiculous.
My Build Back Better plan gets us back on track. We'll make 4 additional years of public education available to every person in America. Two years of high-quality preschool at the front end and investments in community colleges so our students can gain the skills they need to carve out a place for themselves in the 21st-century economy.
Overall, the unemployment report shows that almost 200,000 jobs were created last month—over 300,000 in the private sector and 26,000 in manufacturing—offset by some seasonal adjustments in education hiring.
Our infrastructure used to be the best in the world. Today, according to the World Economic Forum, the United States of America ranks 13th in the world—13th—on infrastructure: roads, bridges, ports, et cetera. We were among the first in the world to guarantee access to universal education back at the turn of the 20th century. Now, the Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development—catch this—ranks America 35 out of 37 major economies when it comes to investing in early childhood education as a percent of GDP. Thirty-five out of thirty-seven. On all these investments that fuel a strong economy, we've taken our foot off the gas. And the world has taken notice, including our adversaries. And now they're closing the gap.
Today, only about half of the 3- and 4-year-olds in America are enrolled in early child education—early childhood education. In Germany, France, the U.K., Latvia, that number is more than 90 percent. We're falling behind.
It's not just early education. According to one study, America ranks—catch this—America ranks 33d out of the 44 advanced economies when it comes to the percentage of our young people who have attained a post-high school degree. The United States, 33d out of 44?
My Build Back plan—Build Back Better plan gets us back on track to making 4 additionals of—years of public education available for every person in America: 2 years of high-quality preschool on the front end, which indicates that over 56 percent of the children will be able to go through all 12 years and beyond without any interruption; and investments in community college so our students can gain the skills they need and carve out a piece—a place for themselves in the 21st-century economy.
And we didn't just build the Interstate Highway System and invest to win the space race. We also were among the first to provide access to free education beginning back at the turn of the 20th century. It was a distinction and a direct—a decision to invest in our children and our families, and it's a major reason why we were able to lead the world in the 21st century. We're one of the few nations in the world that had universal education for everyone, beginning in first—what was then first grade.
But somehow along the way, we sort of stopped investing in our people. Our infrastructure has fallen from the best in the world. According to the World Economic Forum, our infrastructure ranks 13th in the world: roads, bridges, highways, a whole range of things. But just as important is the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development now ranks America 35 out of 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education and care. Say it another way: The world is catching up and beginning to pass us.
When America made 12 years of public education universal more than a century ago, it gave the best educated, best prepared workforce in the world to the rest of the world. But if we were designing public education today, we—all of a sudden, we had none, we said: "Okay, what are we going to do? We need free public education." Does anybody think we'd think 12 years was enough, in the second quarter of the 21st century?
The fact is, today, only about half of 3- and 4-year-olds in America are enrolled in early education childhood—childhood education, like you're doing here. In Germany, France, and the U.K., even Latvia, the number of children in those countries enrolled is 90 percent—90 percent.
My plan gets us back on track. It provides 2 years of high-quality preschool for every child in America. It also makes investments in higher education by increasing Pell grants. I don't know that I can get it done, but I also had proposed free community college, like you've done here in the State of Connecticut, to help students from lower income families attend community colleges and 4-year schools. It invests in Historically Black Colleges and Universities to make sure young people from every neighborhood have a shot at good-paying jobs in the future. We also extend this lady's child tax credit—[laughter]—which is finally a tax cut for the middle class.
Support our law enforcement officers—requires that we invest in the systems that provide adequate health care, counseling, drug treatment and prevention, housing, education, and other social services in the community so there is not the discord.
One of the reasons why we're working so hard—and the Secretary is helping so much—in the Build Back Better plan is that the rest of the world is starting to figure this out; the rest of the world is starting to outeducate us. Early education is earlier and more prevalent in European countries. A significant number—we rank number 34 out of 37 industrial nations in the world in the number of where we rank in terms of people getting a degree beyond high school.
And it also is—I—let me conclude by saying this about something that—as a strong proponent of education, I became friends—and Jill as well—but I became friends with Colin Powell, who we just lost.
NOTE: The President spoke at 3:26 p.m. on the South Lawn at the White House. In his remarks, he referred to Randi Weingarten, president, American Federation of Teachers; Rebecca S. Pringle, president, National Education Association; and 2020 Delaware Teacher of the Year Rebecca Vitelli, a special education teacher at the Colonial Early Education Program at Colwyck Center in New Castle, DE. A portion of these remarks could not be verified because the audio was incomplete.
We were also among the first to provide access to free education, beginning back in the late 1800s, early 1900s. We invested in our children. Does anybody think today, if we were making that decision for the first time, we'd say, "Twelve years is enough in the 21st century"? "Twelve years is enough"? It's not. But back then, they did, and it's the reason why we leapt ahead of the rest of the world. Not a joke. We became among the best educated countries in the world.
We used to lead the world in educational achievement. Today, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Europe ranks America 35 out of 37 major companies [countries]* when it comes to investing in early childhood education.
What's education all about? It's about building confidence in a child. It's about giving the tools to do something.
That's why the second bill is the so-called Build Back Better plan. And here's what it does: It takes education—as I said, when America made 12 years of public education standard a century ago, it gave us the best-educated, best-prepared workforce in the world, and you saw what happened. Think of what would have happened after World War I and how America moved, because we were the best educated—overall—country in the world. And we led in the 20th century.
You know, you all know the statistics—and some of your teachers and your husband used to talk to me about this—and it was really basic: that if you come from a home where the mom or dad have books on the shelves and on the coffee table and read, and you come from a home where mom or dad can't read or has a sixth-grade education or has a little difficulty, the child coming from that middle class home is going to have heard a million more words spoken—not different words, spoken—spoken—than the child coming from a middle class home.
Today, only about half of the 3- and 4-year-olds in America are enrolled in early education at all. Germany, France, the U.K., Latvia—their number is over 90 percent of the children.
It's not just early education. According to one study, we rank 12th among advanced economies when it comes to percentage of our young people who have attained any sort of post-high school degree. Ranked 12th in the world.
The Build Back Better plan gets us back on track. We'll make 2 years of high-quality preschool available to every child in America. Every child. And we're going to make investments education beyond high school. That includes increasing Pell grants, which nearly 200,000 students in Pennsylvania from low-income families rely on to attend college. We're going to increase it by $500. It's up to—so it becomes $1,900.
... and the systematic inequities in this country. We hope that this is not cut from the package, but if it is, what can you do to ensure that all Americans can get the education that they need to face these issues?
You have the vast majority of the 37 major countries in the world, economies, we rank 35 in our investment in education.
We're in a situation where, if you -- if you think about it, when we -- what caused us to move ahead and dominate the 20th century, in the late 1900s -- early 1900s, late 1890s, we came up with, said, 12 years of free education. That was revolutionary at the time. I mean, seriously.
Now, if we were sitting down today and saying, "Oh, we've got to put together an education system," raise your hand if anybody thinks 12 years is enough to compete in the 21st century.
providing college -- I mean, providing professional education beyond 12 years. We rank like -- I think it's -- don't hold me to the number. I think it's 16 or 17 in the world, the United States of America, for God's sake.
Look, folks, just imagine, instead of consigning millions of our children to underresourced schools, we gave every single child in America access to an education at age 3 and age 4, quality preschool. We can afford to do this. We can't afford not to do it.
This will change lives forever. So will historic investments in higher education: significantly increasing Pell grants to help millions of Black students in lower income families attend community colleges and 4-year schools.
Q. Thank you for taking my question, Mr. President. We've heard in the news that the proposal for 2 years of free community college may be cut from your economic package. An educated citizenry is absolutely crucial to solving complex problems like climate change and the systematic inequities in this country. We hope that this is not cut from the package, but if it is, what can you do to ensure that all Americans can get the education that they need to face these issues?
You have the vast majority—of the 37 major countries in the world—economies—we rank 35 in our investment in education. We're in a situation where if you think about it, when we—what caused us to move ahead and dominate the 20th century: In the late 1900s—in the early 1900s, late 1890s, we came up—we said, 12 years of free education. That was revolutionary at the time. I mean, seriously.
Now, if we were sitting down today and saying, "Oh, we've got to put together an education system," raise your hand if anybody thinks 12 years is enough to compete in the 21st century? So that's why what I propose is: free child—free school—free school for every 3- and 4-year-old in America, no matter what their background.
The President. No, look, it really makes a gigantic difference. And think of this: You have more countries in the world with—having—providing college—I mean, providing professional education beyond 12 years. We rank like, I think it's—don't hold me to the number—I think it's 16 or 17 in the world—the United States of America, for God's sake.
We were among the first to provide access to free education—12 years of free education for all—anyone who is an American—beginning back in the late 1800s and the early 1900s. And that decision to invest in our children and our families was a major part—a major part—of why we were able to lead the world for so much of the 20th century. But somewhere along the way, we took our eyes off the ball.
And we used to lead the world in educational achievement. Now, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ranks America 35 out of 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education and care—35 out of 37. We cannot be competitive in the 21st-century global economy if we continue to slide.
Today, only about half of 3- and 4-year-olds in America are enrolled in early education. In Germany, France, the U.K., and even Latvia, that number is over 90 percent. Over 90 percent of 3- and 4-year-olds are in school. My Build Back Better plan gets us back on track. And we'll make 2 years of high-quality preschool available to every child in America.
You all know the stakes. And here are a few things I want you to remember. First, you don't have to wonder what kind of Governor Terry will be because you know what a great Governor he was. It wasn't just because of what he'd promised, it's what he delivered. On his watch, Virginia's economy boomed. Two hundred thousand jobs created. He made a record addition of $1 billion investment in education expanding preschool and resources for public schools in lower income communities and gave teachers a raise. Okay?
In fact, we're taking a page from Terry's book when he was Governor and when he'd be Governor next time. We're emerging from this pandemic, and we want to expand pre-K for 3- and 4-year-olds, millions of pre-K students. That's what's in my Build Back Better initiative. Studies show that when you do this, you increase by 58 percent the chances of a child—will complete the rest of their education in high school and beyond.
Second thing to remember—here's the deal: Virginia Democrats, you've made incredible progress in this State in recent years on jobs, the economy, health care, education, on attracting new business, growing the middle class, and so much more. For more than 40 years in Virginia, it has been the Democrat and Democratic Governors who have led. You've made this progress because you've had the courage and the wisdom to reject the very extremism that has taken over the Republican Party all across America.
We didn't just build an Interstate Highway System, we built a highway to the sky. We invested to win the space race, and we won. We were also among the first to provide access to free education for all Americans, beginning back in the late 1800s.
We used to lead the world in educational achievement. Now, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ranks America 35th out of the 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education and care. And we know how our children start impacts significantly on how they'll finish.
As my wife Jill, who's in the back here, always says: Any country that outeducates us is going to outcompete us. We can finally take us from 12 years to 14 years of universal education in America.
We also make investments in higher education by increasing Pell grants to help students from lower income families attend community colleges and 4-year schools. And we invest in historically Black universities—colleges and universities—HBCUs, minority-serving institutions, and Tribal colleges to make sure every young student has a shot at a good-paying job of the future.
Q. Can you just—what's your message, though, for Democratic voters, especially Black voters who see Republicans running on race, education—lying about critical race theory—and they're worried that Democrats don't have an effective way to push back on that?
You've heard me say it a thousand times: Jill would say—my wife says, "Any country that outeducates us is going to outcompete us." We invested in education. We invested in health. We invested in things that affect people's opportunities to succeed.
We used to lead the world in educational achievement. Now the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development—the OECD—ranks America 35th out of 37 major companies when it comes to investing in early education for childhood education and care. Think about that.
But I sincerely mean it. This is a confusing time—a confusing time. Think of all those children—all those children who may have lost more than a year of education by only being out one semester.
Mr. Harrison. No, no. I agree, Mr. President. We also got a question from an educator, and she said: "As an educator, I've been keeping an eye on the parts of the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the Build Back Better Act that would help our children. Can you explain how these bills would work together to help the next generations of students succeed in their education?"
And the studies have shown that kids who go to pre-K are more likely to stay in school and do better over the course of their education, no matter what the background they come from. Some people come—kids come from backgrounds where, as you know, as a teacher—all the studies show where if you're from a middle class family or an upper middle class family, and there's books and parents read to you, and et cetera, et cetera, you start off having heard a million more words than a kid coming from a poor household or a household with a single parent that didn't have the time to do that.
Look—and we're going to make sure that education beyond high school is more accessible for those families who—[inaudible]—by raising the maximum in what they call Pell grants. And we've increased the amount of Pell grants, and we've invested in community college and workforce programs that will be able to be used for parents who can't afford it.
So it makes a big change in educational opportunity, plus so many other things I believe it does indirectly for kids, in terms of their overall education.
The President. Jaime, you know, the interesting thing is, what really got me focused on preschool and making sure it was available is, you know, of all the countries in the world, we rank number 33—I think it was—out of 44 of the leading countries, according to the OECD, of leading—the most advanced countries in the world—the United States—in early education. We rank at the bottom of the list—the United States of America. And it's long overdue.
Mr. Harrison. Well, and, Mr. President, I think people should also understand that this isn't your first time investing in education. The American Rescue Plan got our schools back open. And that is something that you did, along with all the Democrats in the House and the Senate. And sad to say, not one Republican in either body actually voted for that plan. But it was you who helped to get our schools back open.
And you know, no wonder she was such a tireless champion of education in Delaware—for a better education for every Delawarean. Ruth Ann was a student at Del Tech, where after—before my wife, Jill, taught there for years and years. The reason Jill is not with me today is, she's teaching today, fulltime as a professor at Northern Virginia Community College.
And I might add parenthetically—you know, one of the things that's going to happen: We have another bill that's coming along here that has money for education in it. And it has money for education to provide for money that's directly for community colleges and for apprentice programs and Pell grants to allow people—the colleges to train for what is needed in the workforce—to train for what is needed in the workforce, including major apprentice programs that deal—so you can hire New Hampshire folks to do this work.
Look, my Build Back Better plan is going to provide access to better education. You know, one of the reasons we went ahead of the rest of the world at the turn of the 20th century is, we were the first nation in the world that had universal education for 12 years, not based on any background or income. That pushed us ahead, but the rest of the world has caught up and, in many cases, passed us.
If we were sitting down for the first time today and saying, "We want universal education in America," would anybody say we'd only make it 12 years to compete in the 21st century? I don't think so. So what we're doing is, we're going to make sure that every 3- and 4-year-old in America has access to quality preschool. School, school, school.
And young people graduating from high school will have access to education beyond high school. We're increasing Pell grants, we're providing apprenticeship programs, and we're going to make a huge difference for those 2 million women in America who can't get back into the workforce right now because they can't afford childcare. Look, my Build Back Better plan is going to help solve that.
It has since been expanded to provide disability and education benefits, and increases the number of first responders who are eligible, including children born after the fact. And so it's really important. And you know—and, Pat, you and I used to discuss this all the time in Judiciary 120 years ago here. [Laughter]
And the third bill I will sign is the Colonel John M. McHugh Tuition Fairness and [for]* Survivors Act. For so many of our servicemembers, their service to us is also about building a better life for themselves and for their families. And part of keeping our commitment to them means helping survivors get the education they need and to fulfill their dreams.
And we've invested—we invested in our people. We invested in opportunity in the past. But we're among—we were among the first to provide access to free education in the late 1800s, early 1900s, which had us leap ahead of the rest of the world—the first nation in the world with universal education. We invested to win the space race. We led the world in research and development that led to the creation of the internet. And—but somewhere along the way, we stopped investing. And we're at risk of losing our edge as a nation to China and the rest of the world that's catching up and surpassing us in some areas.
Look what the rest of the world is doing. Look at what the rest of the world is doing. China is investing billions of dollars in early education. I can go down the list.
Look, this Build Back Better plan is also going to ensure that parents can afford childcare and that childcare—and that childcare workers can actually get a raise and—a raise they deserve—and more education.
We built the Interstate Highway System. We invested to win the space race. We were among the first to provide access to free education, beginning back in the late 1800s. These decisions to invest in our country and our families were a major reason why we were able to lead the world for much of the last century.
And we have to invest in our greatest asset as well: our people. For example, we used to lead the world in educational achievement. Now, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ranks America 35 out of 37 major countries when it comes to investing in early childhood education and care. We can't be competitive in the 21st-century global economy if we continue to slide.
And I want to thank the substantial bipartisan vote in the Senate for sending this bill to my desk today to avoid disruption of Government operations. And I want to urge Congress to use the time this bill provides to work toward a bipartisan agreement on a full-year funding bill that makes the needed investments in our economy and our people, from public health, to education, to national security.
And we invested in our people. We gave opportunity. We were among the first to provide access to universal education and high school education at the beginning of the 20th century, which put us in the forefront of leading the rest of the world. We invested to win the space race, and we won it. We led the world in research and development that led to the creation of the internet.
Ninety-five percent of the jobs created in the infrastructure bill don't require a college education. The only way this works is if blue-collar Americans do the building—and the only way it ever worked. And we're going to do it again. Mark my words: We're going to do this again.
They start off at a great disadvantage because their mom or their dad, their single parent doesn't have the education, doesn't have the training. But at 3 years old, the brain is rapidly developing so quickly. It matters. We have to build that foundation for the future for success.
My wife Jill is a first—is a full-time teacher. And you know, she says any nation that outeducates us is going to outcompete us. That's simply a fact. And guess what? Hold it here. Every nation—of the 38 most advanced nations, we rank 34 in the world—34 in the world—in early education for children—the United States of America.
I truly believe—and I promise you this—I believe that 50 years from now when historians look back on this moment, they're going to say this was the moment that America won the competition for the 21st century. Think about it: Most of you who are over 40 remember us always having the number-one infrastructure in the world, the most—best education, et cetera. We rank now number 8 in the world, in terms of investment in research and development; 14th in infrastructure—the United States of America.
And so we're—I've instructed my team to make you all aware of everything that is available from a Federal level. And some of it has to do outside of FEMA, outside of the—Homeland Security. There's other programs, including education, a whole range of things.
You know, one of the things that I remember—and I'll end this with—I was talking with, you know, Jim Clyburn, who was a great help to me in the campaign in South Carolina. And Jim said—and when he would endorse me—and there was a clip on television the last couple days of Jim. And it said that we want to make things accessible and affordable for all Americans. That's health care, that's education, that's prescription drugs, that's making sure you have access—access—to all the things that everybody else has. We can afford to do that. We can't afford not to do it.
The President. No, I don't think so. When you say "more realistic," I think it's extremely realistic to say to people, because—let me back up. You all really know the politics in this country, and your networks and others. You've spent a lot of time, which I'm glad you do, polling this data, determining where the—what the American people's attitudes are, et cetera. The American people overwhelmingly agree with me on prescription drugs. They overwhelmingly agree with me on the cost of education. They overwhelmingly agree with me on early education. They overwhelmingly—and go on the list—on childcare.
Q. And on Omicron and education, teachers are in result in some—in revolt in so many places. Parents are at odds over closing schools and remote learning. You say we're not going to go back to closing schools—you said that just moments ago—yet they're closing in some areas. What do you say to those teachers and principals and parents about school closings? And what can your administration do to help make up for learning loss for students?
Number two, I know that the two people who've opposed, on the Democratic side at least, support a number of the things that are in there. For example, Joe Manchin strongly supports early education, 3 and 4 years of age. Strongly supports that. There is strong support for, I think, a number of the way in which to pay for these—pay for this proposal.
If you get to trade off higher gas as—you're putting up with a higher price of hamburgers and gas, versus whether or not you're going to have to—you're going to be able to pay for education and/or childcare and the like, I think most people would make the trade. Their bottom line would be better in middle class households.
My friend—and he really is a friend, and he's continued to be a loyal friend—Jim Clyburn, our leader, says it best. He says it's all about making everything more affordable and more accessible to everybody—to everybody—to ordinary folks like the house I grew up in. That's why we've got to keep pushing the Build Back Better plan to make childcare more affordable and accessible, to make eldercare more affordable and accessible, and make health care and prescription drugs, education more affordable and accessible.
The DNC is going to keep pushing on voter education, on voter engagement, voter protection in States, while we continue to push for Federal legislation. And we're going to need your help. Together, we're going to stand up to the "big lie" and the Republican efforts to—for voter suppression and election subversion. That's what they're doing.
And on education, today, about half of the 3- and 4-year-olds are enrolled in early childhood education. In Germany, France, U.K., Latvia, the number is more than 90 percent. Where the hell are—heck are we? [Laughter] No, I'm serious. We're falling further and further behind the curve. But we can fix that problem. We can do this and more on health care, nutrition, and a host of other issues.
Then take universal pre-K: If we're designing our education system today—and I think we've talked with some of you about this before—I doubt whether anyone would think that 12 years is enough in the 21st—second half of the 21st—second quarter of the 21st century. And so what we do here is, we want to have the best educated workforce. And that's why universal pre-K is going to mean so much.
And I know that the education funds helped many of you stay open, keep your schools open, and keep them open safely. There's a lot of money you have there for everything from dealing with ventilation to clean buses—school buses and everything in between. There's no reason why we can't keep our schools open, in my view.
I traveled the country, bringing together leaders of health care, technology, education, business, and technology. I visited most of the major cancer centers, literally, in the world, met with heads of state in those countries, and decided how we could work together to try to make progress. I remember a particularly good meeting in Australia.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
You know, what people don't understand if they're not—don't know the industry is, you know, it's like you going to college, kid. Four years. Four years of busting your neck, learning a trade. This isn't something you walk up and show up in a day and raise your hand, "I need a job." You work like the devil for it. Fortunately, you get paid while you're doing it, and you're able to do it, but it is an education—full-blown education you're getting in your trade.
And you know, it's amazing what you all do. I really mean it. I'm not being solicitous. After a year of disruption for our kids, we were able to add education jobs in 2021, more than—more than any other year on record. You got county law enforcement officers and first responders back on the job so ambulances could arrive on time and communities could be kept safe.
Second, let's take on mental health—especially among our children, whose lives and education have been turned upside down. The American Rescue Plan gave schools money to hire teachers and help students make up for lost learning. I urge every parent to make sure your school does just that. They have the money. We can all play a part. Sign up to be a tutor or a mentor. Children were also struggling before the pandemic: bullying, violence, trauma, and the harms of social media.
The Federal Government spends about $600 billion a year in goods and services to fulfill its responsibilities to the American people, from the Defense Department, to health care, to education, and beyond. The fact—in fact, what's happening is the Federal Government is Siemens's largest customer, for example.
Ms. Door. Absolutely. I think everyone inside our company—and I even think, you ask consumers—and world leaders are very, very familiar now with semiconductors and how critical they are to technology, research and development, upskilling the workforce, and STEM education. So, absolutely.
And that's why—I'm not going to get into it right now, but that's why we have to make sure we have our education system up and running so we can produce the kind of workers we need, et cetera.
And I just—I should probably tell you that my mother, when I took—when we went to Ireland, and we were—we were in the south, and my father was a real gentleman. And his greatest regret was he never had a college education.
Associate Justice-designate Jackson. They also tell me that I'm a role model, which I take both as an opportunity and as a huge responsibility. I am feeling up to the task, primarily because I know that I am not alone. I am standing on the shoulders of my own role models, generations of Americans who never had anything close to this kind of opportunity, but who got up every day and went to work believing in the promise of America, showing others through their determination and, yes, their perseverance that good—good—things can be done in this great country: from my grandparents on both sides, who had only a grade-school education but instilled in my parents the importance of learning; to my parents, who went to racially segregated schools growing up and were the first in their families to have the chance to go to college.
We have a great opportunity ahead of us with the bipartisan innovation act I mentioned, which is going to provide $90 billion in research and development, STEM education, manufacturing, all those elements of the supply chain that need to—we need to produce end-products right here in America.
The bottom line is this: The United States is in the position to outcompete the world once again. We have an incredible opportunity ahead of us, and we still face tremendous challenges. But if we can keep coming together, invest in the backbone of American—the middle class, our great universities, hard-working families, STEM education, clean technologies for tomorrow—there's simply no limit—I mean it—no limit to what we can achieve.
Education never stops. The determined spirit of education is what we wanted to honor in this Easter Egg Roll. So we turned the South Lawn into a school community.
We used to have, for example, the number-one infrastructure in the world. We invested in America. We invest—one of the reasons why we were the leading country in the world in the 20th century was because we were the best educated country in the world. Others had more prominent education systems for the narrow minority, but we were the only country in the world that had universal education from kindergarten through high school, for 12 years, regardless. And it mattered.
But my generic point is this: We have not invested in ourselves; the American Government has not invested in America, either in our education and in our technology. We used to provide—and now you all are doing it—but we used to provide from the Government—2 percent of our GDP was invested in research and development. It's less than 1 percent now. Less than 1 percent.
We used to be in a situation where—if you think about it, why were we the most powerful nation in the world, beginning—in the beginning of the 21st century—the 20th century? Because the only nation in the world that had universal education from K through 12.
Other people—they had great education systems for the elite in—throughout Europe and great universities and great, great what we would call "high school." But it wasn't universal. The rest of the world has caught up with us and what have we done? Does anybody think if, today, we said we're going to have a national education system, that we'd say 12 years is enough? Anybody think 12 years is enough in the 21st century—in the second quarter of the 21st century? What are we doing? We're resisting what we know to be the case.
That's reality. That's how, I think—how human nature functions. And so I don't think I'm going to change human nature, but I think the more we are—go around the country, talking about what we've done, talking about what we can do, talk about the impact of the—everything from the—what we've done in terms of health care, what we've done in terms of the whole notion of how we're going to deal with education, the way in which we're going to deal with the notion of the infrastructure bill that's going to fundamentally change—your State is going to get hundreds of millions of dollars to do good things.
You know, through your Lightning Community Hero program, you've delivered more than $25 million in critical causes to the region—for critical causes in the region; provided food and clothing for the families in need; supported early education for youth mentorship programs. Lifting up local nonprofits; donating to veterans' hospitals, community colleges, and other vital institutions all across Western Florida, along with hundreds of other initiatives you engaged in.
No matter where she was, she understood people. She cared about people. And all of that was grounded in an education gained by watching her father, Josef Korbel—and her mentor as well. She learned diplomacy at the dinner table. And throughout her life, nothing mattered to Madeleine more than the family—nothing.
And I watched how hard it was, how really hard. There was so much heroic work to help kids connect, get connected to schools, and just the socialization that they were missing in so many places for so long. It's estimated they're 5 to 7 months behind in their education right now.
With the help of the American Rescue Plan, local governments were able to—as the State officials here can tell you—in education—were able to add a record 279,000 new educators in 2021—two hundred and seventy—50,000—another 50,000 jobs—teaching jobs in the first months of 2022.
You know, parenthetically, if you think about it: What was the reason why we led the world—beginning around nineteen-five, -six, and -seven, and -eight? Because we became the first nation in the world to have universal education of 1 through 12, for everybody—no matter what, without cost.
Well, guess what? If we were sitting down today, deciding we were going to set up an education system, raise your hand if any of you think 12 years is enough in the 21st century? Just 12 years. Things are moving too rapidly. They're changing exponentially.
And also proposing the largest increase in special education funding in 2 decades. We made the promise; we've never filled—fulfilled it. We've got to fulfill it. We've got to add another billion-dollar commitment with the goal of doubling the number of social workers, school counselors, and school nurses in K through 12. And by the way, thanks to the American Rescue Plan, we're making real progress towards that goal.
NOTE: The President spoke at 4:35 p.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his remarks, he referred to 2022 National Teacher of the Year Kurt Russell, history teacher, Oberlin High School in Oberlin, OH, who introduced the President, and his wife Donna Russell, assistant dean for student support, Oberlin College; 2022 Delaware State Teacher of the Year Jahsha Tabron, special education teacher, Brandywine High School in Wilmington, DE; former Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, who died on March 23; and former Presidents William J. Clinton and Barack Obama. He also referred to his sister Valerie Biden Owens.
Our relationship with Mexico is special. And I'm so grateful to be joined today by the First Lady of Mexico—Dr. Gutiérrez—Beatriz. From our love of poetry and literature to our shared passion for education, we have so much in common. You know, Joe always says that politics is personal, and I'm grateful to continue building our friendship. Actually, we already have plans for what we're going to do next time we're together. [Laughter]
A few years ago, at the national LULAC conference, I met with a young group of Mexican Americans and other Latino leaders. They told me about the issues that were on their minds: education, climate change, health care, and jobs—just like anyone their age. But what struck me was that they said that they didn't often feel seen or heard. And that touched my heart. Don't we owe them better?
Look, our hope is that the compact will grow with more companies and expand into different industries. And as part of this initiative, agencies across the Federal Government—all across the Federal Government—are going to step up with access to loans, technical assistance, and so much more, including education. We're supporting this new partnership because this private sector has told us they can't do it alone.
Look, folks, our economy has gone from being on the mend to being on the move. You know, it started with my American Rescue Plan. Because of it, we had the best year of State and local job growth in 20 years. We gave Governors—great Governors like the one in this State—we gave them a whole lot of money. We added back 460,000 jobs: critical State and local workers, educators, firefighters, police officers. This includes a record 279,000 education jobs in 2021, because they didn't have the tax base to be able to hire them.
But it made me realize: How about that single woman with a high-school education or less, with two little kids without a dad, how in God's name they can make it? And yet how can they go to work?
And I think we have to point out how radical it is—how radical it is—so people are reminded what's at stake here, not only internationally, but domestically, in terms of people's basic fundamental rights, in terms of education.
I also set a goal, before I took office, of getting a majority of schools in K through 8 fully open in the first 100 days. Now, thanks to the enormous amount of work done by our administration, educators, parents, local, State education officials and leaders, a recent Department of Education Department survey shows that nearly half of the K-through-8 schools are open now full time, 5 days a week, for in-person learning. Not yet a majority, but we're really close. And I believe, in the 35 days left to go, we'll meet that goal as well.
First is access to a good education. When this Nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best educated, best prepared Nation in the world. It's, I believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century.
But the world has caught up, or catching up. They are not waiting. I would say, parenthetically: If we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, "Okay, we're going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education," I wonder whether we'd think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. I doubt it. Twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. That's why my American Families Plan guarantees 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting as early as we can.
The President. By being engaged in a whole range of programs. We talked today—everything from mental health programs to engaging people early on and letting them know there is other options. Making sure that when a child is young, they have access to a real education, and they get started off on the right foot.
Here's the thing for me: You talked about people—and this is important for people who look like me. My grandmother would sit around when I was a kid, fifth grade—had a fifth-grade education. I learned that she couldn't read when I was doing my homework. And she would tell me stories about people asking her to count the number of jellybeans in the jar or the soap.
Support our law enforcement officers—requires that we invest in the systems that provide adequate health care, counseling, drug treatment and prevention, housing, education, and other social services in the community so there is not the discord.
Look, folks, just imagine, instead of consigning millions of our children to underresourced schools, we gave every single child in America access to an education at age 3 and age 4, quality preschool. We can afford to do this. We can't afford not to do it.
This will change lives forever. So will historic investments in higher education: significantly increasing Pell grants to help millions of Black students in lower income families attend community colleges and 4-year schools.
It has since been expanded to provide disability and education benefits, and increases the number of first responders who are eligible, including children born after the fact. And so it's really important. And you know—and, Pat, you and I used to discuss this all the time in Judiciary 120 years ago here. [Laughter]
And I know that the education funds helped many of you stay open, keep your schools open, and keep them open safely. There's a lot of money you have there for everything from dealing with ventilation to clean buses—school buses and everything in between. There's no reason why we can't keep our schools open, in my view.
And so I don't want them ending up back in prison or being there because they've committed another crime. We need to be able to train for and get a job, find stable housing, reenter society, and have a second chance at a better life. My Department of Labor is funding programs that help formerly incarcerated individuals, including young adults, receive the education and training they need and then connect them to quality jobs.
Second, let's take on mental health—especially among our children, whose lives and education have been turned upside down. The American Rescue Plan gave schools money to hire teachers and help students make up for lost learning. I urge every parent to make sure your school does just that. They have the money. We can all play a part. Sign up to be a tutor or a mentor. Children were also struggling before the pandemic: bullying, violence, trauma, and the harms of social media.
And that's why—I'm not going to get into it right now, but that's why we have to make sure we have our education system up and running so we can produce the kind of workers we need, et cetera.
We used to have, for example, the number-one infrastructure in the world. We invested in America. We invest—one of the reasons why we were the leading country in the world in the 20th century was because we were the best educated country in the world. Others had more prominent education systems for the narrow minority, but we were the only country in the world that had universal education from kindergarten through high school, for 12 years, regardless. And it mattered.
During my State of the Union Address, I announced what I called a unity agenda that brings the country together to address the big challenges we face. And one of those included ending the opioid epidemic and addressing the mental health crisis. So many, young and old, because of this pandemic, need help. And having a problem—a mental problem—is no different that breaking your arm or your leg. You need invest in systems that provide adequate health care, counseling drug treatment, prevention, housing, education, and other social services to those that need it most.
Right now, in most places, you serve your time in prison, you get a bus ticket and 25 bucks, and you end up under the same bridge you got arrested under the first time. They should have access to education and housing. Give them a chance to move beyond where they were.
Believing education is a cornerstone of our democracy, she created a culture of excellence, affirmation, and intellectual curiosity for generations of students, many the first in their families to go to college and who see their American Dream through her and because of her.
The idea that we—if we—one of the reasons we led the world for so long: At the turn of the 20th century, we were the only nation in the world that had 12 years of free education for everyone—everyone. But the rest of the world has caught up and passed us.
But—and you know—and in the process of—of all of this, you know, we found ourselves in a situation where I pointed out when I met with the Roundtable—the Business Roundtable—that they used to pay for that education. When the DuPont company came up with a new product, they educated their public on their employees. They took responsibility. Well, very few corporations do that anymore.
Now, is it—and I've asked this—I've asked this question to the Roundtable, for real. Isn't it in the interest of corporate America if we have a better educated public? It—doesn't that make sense? Does anybody think that we, in the United States of America—one of the reasons we became the leading country in the world is because we had mandatory education, free education from ages—grades 1 through 12 at the turn of the last century—the turn of the 20th century.
Now, I say, isn't it better—wouldn't you rather have a better educated workforce? If we were starting off to set up public education today, how many of you would say 12 years is enough in the second quarter of the 21st century to compete? I don't know anybody who thinks that. And yet, it's—we can do it, and we can afford to do it, and we can do it not cheaply, but we can do it well.
Hey, folks, how are you all? I'm going to talk about more than just the NEA today because—and I want to—I've told your president I want to come back and just talk pure education as well. But I want to talk a little—much broader. And, Becky, thanks for hosting us. I appreciate it very much.
With his predecessors—Rabbi Kraft and Rabbi Geffen—that's where I received my education. I probably went to shul more than many of you did. [Laughter] You all think I'm kidding. He can tell you I'm not. [Laughter] I'm not.
We're going to make sure there's a lot of things. For example, all the studies show that—and there was a major study done between—I think it was Harvard and Stanford about—about early education.
But imagine—you know, what they do, they open up a new enterprise. They'd hire—they'd educate their employees that they hired. They'd put them through the education they needed to be able to deal with the problem.
Well, you know, it seemed—and I—so I met with the Business Roundtable as well. I said, "What do you guys think?" They said, "Well"—they kind of—everyone nodded their heads and said, "Yes, yes, we should be educating." Not we, corporations—we, the country, should be educating—investing more in education.
But you know, the fact is that we're also in a circumstance where there's a lot that we can do in the meantime to make sure that there's an access to good education across the board. And that is by doing things that relate to starting education at age 3—formal schooling at age 3—which it increases—not daycare, but school. All the studies over 10 years show that that increases the prospect of someone making it through 12 years without any difficulty, no matter what the background they come from, by 56 percent.
And I also think that we should be making sure that we have the ability to provide for 2 years of education beyond that, whether it's apprenticeships or community colleges. And we also are in a situation where I think that—for example, I want to make sure we—a lot of it has to do with finances as well—that we make sure that we have help for people who come from modest means to be able to get to school.
You know, the cost of college education has increased fourfold. And it used to be that a Pell grant would cover something like 70 percent of the college tuition. Now it covers significantly less than that. So I want to increase the Pell grants as well.
Restoring the dignity of work means making education an affordable ticket to the middle class. You know, when we made public education—12 years of it—universal in the last century, we made the best educated, best paid—we became the best education, best paid nation in the world.
Folks, we all know 12 years of education is not enough to win the economic competition of the 21st century. If we want to have the best educated workforce, let's finish the job by providing access to preschool for 3 and 4 years old. Studies show that children who go to preschool are nearly 50-percent more likely to finish high school and go on to earn a 2- or 4-year degree, no matter their background they came from.
We also need more first responders and professionals to address the growing mental health, substance abuse challenges. More resources to reduce violent crime and gun crime. More community intervention programs. More investments in housing, education, and job training. All this can help prevent violence in the first place.
Speaking of education, instead of a photo ops, we're delivering nearly $6 billion—I promised we would do—$6 billion for—to HBCUs. Without the kind of foundations that other schools have, we've got to make sure they have the same laboratories, the same research capacities as everybody else. Because their students can do anything anybody else can do, but they need to have the facility to do it.
The President. And you don't need a college education.
How many of you before had, in small towns in North Carolina, a—someone goes out and gets a decent education, and the son or daughter comes in: "Mom, I can't stay here. There's no jobs for me. I've got to leave." Well, you're going to be able to stay. You're going to be able to stay.
I always knew that Joe would be a great education President. Because he's seen how hard you work and how much you help our students. And that's why he's done so much to support better pay and loan forgiveness.
"Bearer of good news," the meaning of my Iranian name, is the phrase I've spent my career leaning into. Just like my own teachers, my fellow state teachers of the year, and the millions of other teachers in this country, I want to bring the good news of joy and hope to my students, and to reciprocate that gift of education that my teachers gave me.
As educators, we stand with one foot firmly grounded in the reality of what is while the other stands in the promise of what can be. We are fueled by the equalizing power of public education to dismantle marginalization, eliminate systemic inequities, and end generational poverty.
And for the first time in 45 years, the Department of Education is updating critical regulations for how public schools can make sure that students with disabilities get the education that we promised them and they're entitled to. And that includes preventing harassment; ensuring equal access to school facilities, playgrounds; and rigorous classwork.
We've learned a lot about disabilities over the last 45 years. Our education policy should reflect what we've learned.
And let's provide access to preschool for 3- and 4-years-old. In the last century, when we made 12 years of public education universal in America, we had the best educated, best prepared nation in the world. So now let's finish the job.
If that were to pass, it would mean cutting up to 60,000 teaching jobs, affecting 25 million children—it's a hard and fast—they're introducing it on—I believe tomorrow or Wednesday—affecting 25 million children. Cutting education is the last thing this country needs.
Always promoting, excellence, leadership, and truth and service. It really has. And a proving ground for future leaders of science, medicine, education, business, faith, arts, entertainment, and public service. Trailblazing intellectuals, lawyers, doctors. The first Black—I might say—Vice President of the United States of America. You can say that again.
So, folks, you know, there's an awful lot that is being done relative to the environment. There's an awful lot being done in terms of our ability to grow the economy. There's an awful lot that needs to be done on education. I need not tell you, Mr. President.
Stanford and Harvard did studies about what is, over the last 10 years, what is that will help people—keep people going in terms of education. If you send—we learned all those statistics—I remember all you involved in this stuff know—that when you come from a broken home, where there's no books and mom or dad is an addict, and they can't get things—you know, you have no guidance—by the time you get to preschool—to school, I should say—kindergarten—you will have heard a million few words—fewer spoken, total. Total. The same words, but a million words fewer. And you also are going to be in a situation where you have had significantly less exposure to learning, period.
So one of the things I'm going to continue to work on is early education, as well as free community college for people who, in fact, don't have the income to get there.
And you know, I knew that Joe would always be the education President, because he knows that our Nation's—you know, the success of our Nation starts with you, the educators who shape our students' lives.
And so, you know, we've invested so much in our schools and our counselors and our nurses and administrators who make them all successful. And as he transforms, you know, our economy, creating millions of jobs that are shaping the future, he knows that education is key to filling those critical roles.
That's the Biden education pathway. And it starts with free, high-quality universal—totally—preschool and creates a kindergarten through 12th-grade experience that prepares our students for their next steps.
And together, through the Biden education pathway, we can fundamentally transform what it means to make a living and make a life here in America.
And now, I'd like to introduce the man who will never stop fighting for you, who knows how important teachers and unions are to our students and to our country, my husband, the education president, Joe Biden.
Another thing we can do—[applause]—is—to help with the educator shortage is to reduce the burden teachers face paying back their loans. When I came to office, there was a program called the Public Loan Service Forgiveness [Public Service Loan Forgiveness; White House correction] program. It was a total mess. And this was designed, if you'd engage in public service, you can get your debt forgiven for education.
But what he said was—[laughter]—to paraphrase him, he said: "The penalty good people pay for not being involved in politics is being governed by people worse themselves. Run, Joe. Run." That's the power of a great educator. No, I really mean it. Think about—all of you had somebody—somebody in your education who was just there for you, gave you confidence.
The CBC has always been a conscience of our country, a truthteller. Truths about where we have been and where we must go. Tonight let us continue to speak truth. Across America there is a full-on attack on many of the hard-fought, hard-won freedoms that the CBC has achieved: the freedom to vote; to teach America's full history; to address inequity and diversity; to love who you love; to access education, health care, and economic opportunity; and the freedom of a woman to make decisions about her own body.
And we stand with the CBC to reduce disparities in jobs, health care, and education, working hand in hand to close the racial wealth gap and staying committed to Black America's prosperity.
And one other thing it means. It means if they passed away, their children are entitled to the education benefits and the other benefits they would have been if he'd been alive and come home—they'd been alive and come home. So, folks, look, the same way, as I said, with Agent Orange.
To remain the strongest economy in the world, we need to have the best education system in the world. And I, like I suspect all of you, want to give a child—every child a good start by providing access to preschool for 3- and 4-years-old.
I met a year and a half ago with the leaders of the Business Roundtable. They were mad that I was ever—angry—I—well, they were discussing—[laughter]—why I wanted to spend money on education.
A fair Tax Code is how we invest in things that make this country great: health care, education, defense, and so much more.
And look, you know, that's not all. He wants to get rid of all the programs we put together—from health care, to education, to small-business help. And Social Security, he wants to cut. He said, "No, I don't want to cut it." He just said, "But there's a lot you can do to trim and cut."
We'd be able to have childcare again for everybody at $300 per kid. We'd be able to make sure that everybody has an access to an education. We'd be able to have early education for families that don't have the capacity.
Imagine what we could do—from everything from the deficit to taking care of kids, education, so many—I see a future where we save the planet from the climate crisis and our country from gun violence.
Our administration will launch a massive public education campaign to rebuild that trust.

But—and you know—and in the process of—of all of this, you know, we found ourselves in a situation where I pointed out when I met with the Roundtable—the Business Roundtable—that they used to pay for that education. When the DuPont company came up with a new product, they educated their public on their employees. They took responsibility. Well, very few corporations do that anymore.
Now, is it—and I've asked this—I've asked this question to the Roundtable, for real. Isn't it in the interest of corporate America if we have a better educated public? It—doesn't that make sense? Does anybody think that we, in the United States of America—one of the reasons we became the leading country in the world is because we had mandatory education, free education from ages—grades 1 through 12 at the turn of the last century—the turn of the 20th century.
Now, I say, isn't it better—wouldn't you rather have a better educated workforce? If we were starting off to set up public education today, how many of you would say 12 years is enough in the second quarter of the 21st century to compete? I don't know anybody who thinks that. And yet, it's—we can do it, and we can afford to do it, and we can do it not cheaply, but we can do it well.
Look, a fair Tax Code is how we invest in the things that make this country great from health care, education, defense, and so much more—research, development. But here's the deal. The last administration enacted a $2 trillion tax cut—$2 trillion tax cut—that benefits the very wealthy in the top 1 percent, the biggest corporations, and it exploded the Federal deficit.
And, by the way, the other thing is we're in a situation where I talk about education for black communities. I've raised the number, the amount of money for Pell grants by other $8,000 for anybody making under $70,000 a year, are going to be able to get $15,000 towards their tuition.
THE PRESIDENT: Look, take a look at what's your, your bottom line is in your economy now. Take a look how those unemployment’s the lowest it’s been there. Take a look at how many of you, you, the new jobs are created. Take a look at how many people are been able to get to college education and get the debt wiped out. Take a look at what's actually happening on the ground. Take a look at the fight that's going on.
And so it's about giving healthcare. It's about making sure there's opportunity for people to have a good education. We should be—I've been pushing and we're going to get it done—early education. You know—you know all the studies better than I, as well as I do, that you come out of a neighborhood or a sc—a house where there's no books, where there's a, a dysfunctional family, where there's a problem—and you start off school, you hear million fewer words haven't been spoken because not, there's not conversation. Well, guess what? The studies show now, if you have three, four and five year olds going to early education, not, not daycare—education, you increase by 56% their ability to go through 12 years of school and on to Community College. And I'm gonna make Community College free. There's so many opportunities we have, and I think the community is beginning to see it. At least I hope so.
An expert on labor economics, race, poverty, and education.

She's spent the past decade working to improve blighted neighborhoods and create safer, more affordable communities. She also understands where you live impacts your health, access to education, jobs, and economic opportunity.

First is access to a good education. When this Nation made 12 years of public education universal in the last century, it made us the best educated, best prepared Nation in the world. It's, I believe, the overwhelming reason that propelled us to where we got in the 21st—in the 20th century.
But the world has caught up, or catching up. They are not waiting. I would say, parenthetically: If we were sitting down, put a bipartisan committee together and said, "Okay, we're going to decide what we do in terms of government providing for free education," I wonder whether we'd think, as we did in the 20th century, that 12 years is enough in the 21st century. I doubt it. Twelve years is no longer enough today to compete with the rest of the world in the 21st century. That's why my American Families Plan guarantees 4 additional years of public education for every person in America, starting as early as we can.
Additionally, if teens are on the move this summer, they can get their first shot in one place and the second shot elsewhere. At the same time, we're also launching an important public education campaign. First and foremost, we're providing families with trusted medical information they need to make informed decisions about the vaccination and the vaccine.
And I'd also point out that I think what this shows is that—I think we have to make a greater investment in education as it relates to being able to train and graduate more people proficient in cybersecurity.
Here's the thing for me: You talked about people—and this is important for people who look like me. My grandmother would sit around when I was a kid, fifth grade—had a fifth-grade education. I learned that she couldn't read when I was doing my homework. And she would tell me stories about people asking her to count the number of jellybeans in the jar or the soap.
Think about it. If we were having the debate that was taking place in the United States in the late 1890s and the early 1900s about public education, do you think any of us would say 12 years of free public education was enough to compete in the 21st century? Not a joke. Think about it. What do you think? I don't think there's a shot if we were doing that today.
For example, I think—from the Build Back Better program—it's required that we in fact have the best education available to us. And I'll be speaking to this in detail tomorrow.
But look, here's the situation: How can we, in an ever-competitive world, increasingly competitive world—how can we not meet the educational standards of—at least other countries are working toward? Nobody is reducing the number of years they want their children to go to school or people to go school.
And I want to thank the substantial bipartisan vote in the Senate for sending this bill to my desk today to avoid disruption of Government operations. And I want to urge Congress to use the time this bill provides to work toward a bipartisan agreement on a full-year funding bill that makes the needed investments in our economy and our people, from public health, to education, to national security.
I traveled the country, bringing together leaders of health care, technology, education, business, and technology. I visited most of the major cancer centers, literally, in the world, met with heads of state in those countries, and decided how we could work together to try to make progress. I remember a particularly good meeting in Australia.
The Federal Government spends about $600 billion a year in goods and services to fulfill its responsibilities to the American people, from the Defense Department, to health care, to education, and beyond. The fact—in fact, what's happening is the Federal Government is Siemens's largest customer, for example.
Ms. Door. Absolutely. I think everyone inside our company—and I even think, you ask consumers—and world leaders are very, very familiar now with semiconductors and how critical they are to technology, research and development, upskilling the workforce, and STEM education. So, absolutely.
We have a great opportunity ahead of us with the bipartisan innovation act I mentioned, which is going to provide $90 billion in research and development, STEM education, manufacturing, all those elements of the supply chain that need to—we need to produce end-products right here in America.
The bottom line is this: The United States is in the position to outcompete the world once again. We have an incredible opportunity ahead of us, and we still face tremendous challenges. But if we can keep coming together, invest in the backbone of American—the middle class, our great universities, hard-working families, STEM education, clean technologies for tomorrow—there's simply no limit—I mean it—no limit to what we can achieve.
No matter where she was, she understood people. She cared about people. And all of that was grounded in an education gained by watching her father, Josef Korbel—and her mentor as well. She learned diplomacy at the dinner table. And throughout her life, nothing mattered to Madeleine more than the family—nothing.
Look, our hope is that the compact will grow with more companies and expand into different industries. And as part of this initiative, agencies across the Federal Government—all across the Federal Government—are going to step up with access to loans, technical assistance, and so much more, including education. We're supporting this new partnership because this private sector has told us they can't do it alone.
And look, one of the things that I promise you we're going to do is, we're going to continue to invest in the education side of this to have—so you have the best trained, the best equipped workers in the world. I really mean it. And particularly with regard to our community colleges, which have great assets to bring to the—to bring to bear.
So it's just not—I think it's a good Education : Postsecondary education :: Federal student loans, partial forgiveness thing, it frees a lot of people up, it's going to grow the economy. We still have a way to go, but I'm optimistic.
I've traveled the country, brought together leaders in health care, technology, education, business, philanthropy. I visited many of the major cancer research centers in the world. And nowhere—no matter where I was or what the topic at hand, world leaders wanted to talk to me about our Cancer Moonshot. That's not hyperbole, that's a fact.
But you know, the fact is that we're also in a circumstance where there's a lot that we can do in the meantime to make sure that there's an access to good education across the board. And that is by doing things that relate to starting education at age 3—formal schooling at age 3—which it increases—not daycare, but school. All the studies over 10 years show that that increases the prospect of someone making it through 12 years without any difficulty, no matter what the background they come from, by 56 percent.
And I also think that we should be making sure that we have the ability to provide for 2 years of education beyond that, whether it's apprenticeships or community colleges. And we also are in a situation where I think that—for example, I want to make sure we—a lot of it has to do with finances as well—that we make sure that we have help for people who come from modest means to be able to get to school.
You know, the cost of college education has increased fourfold. And it used to be that a Pell grant would cover something like 70 percent of the college tuition. Now it covers significantly less than that. So I want to increase the Pell grants as well.
Together, we've provided billions of dollars in direct budgetary support to make sure the Ukrainian Government can keep providing basic, fundamental services to the Ukrainian people like health care, education, and emergency personnel.
What are the things that make it grow? Well, first of all, let me—I could go on, but I'm just going to give you one example. We're in a situation where, if you were a—one of the reasons why America became the most advanced and economically prosperous nation in the 21st century: We're the first nation in the world have a universal education system—grades 1 through 12. Now, others had systems that were superior to ours, in terms of their exclusiveness, but not universal.
Now, I wonder if anybody—if today we were starting off and saying, "Oh, we're going to decide—we decide we're going to have to have a universal education system," would anybody think, in the second quarter of the 21st century, that 12 years was enough to compete?
So a lot of you are doing a lot of experimental work, in terms of not just pre-K, but you're doing it in terms of education—teaching kids to read, write, add, and subtract at 3 and 4 and 5 years old, and not—and you're focusing on apprentice programs after college.
But when, you know, there were shop classes in school where people learned whether they could—if they're comfortable working with their hands, whether they—so there's a lot of things that we can do in education.
And a lot of folks are in a situation where if they just had somebody to talk to, they just had—and that's why I think some of the things we can do that can also help families going through some really difficult times is, for example, a preschool education. Reading, writing, arithmetic—age 3.
For decades, we were the—not only—we were the only country in the world—we led the world economically. We were the only economy in the world that was moving that fast because we had the best educated public in the world. We started before any other country—other had—higher education was more sophisticated and a lot of private institutions. But we—everybody in America at the turn of the nine—the 20th century said—that we could go to school for free 12 years. It was a gamechanger. It was a gamechanger.
MAGA Republicans—you know, they don't want things that particularly are going to help working families—like health care, education, public safety—which are going to raise costs on folks. Look, MAGA Republicans also refuse to raise a single penny in new taxes on the wealthiest people.
