The truth is, on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives – on health care and education and the economy – Senator McCain has been anything but independent. He said that our economy has made "great progress" under this President. He said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong. And when one of his chief advisors – the man who wrote his economic plan – was talking about the anxiety Americans are feeling, he said that we were just suffering from a "mental recession," and that we've become, and I quote, "a nation of whiners."
Now, I don't believe that Senator McCain doesn't care what's going on in the lives of Americans. I just think he doesn't know. Why else would he define middle-class as someone making under five million dollars a year? How else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million Americans? How else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people's benefits, or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college, or a plan that would privatize Social Security and gamble your retirement?
Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves – protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology.
Now is the time to finally meet our moral obligation to provide every child a world-class education, because it will take nothing less to compete in the global economy. Michelle and I are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education. And I will not settle for an America where some kids don't have that chance. I'll invest in early childhood education. I'll recruit an army of new teachers, and pay them higher salaries and give them more support. And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability. And we will keep our promise to every young American – if you commit to serving your community or your country, we will make sure you can afford a college education.
What I've said here in Washington is that we've got to make some tough choices; we got to make some tough budgetary choices. What we can't do, though, is sacrifice long-term growth, investments that are critical to the future. And that's why my budget focuses on health care, energy, education, the kinds of things that can build a foundation for long-term economic growth, as opposed to the fleeting prosperity that we've seen over the last several years.
The President. Well, I've emphasized repeatedly what I expect out of this budget. I expect that there's serious efforts at health care reform and that we are driving down costs for families and businesses and, ultimately, for the Federal and State governments that are going to be broke if we continue on the current path. I've said that we've got to have a serious energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy. We've got to invest in education, K-12 and beyond, to upgrade the skills of the American worker so we can compete in the international economy. And I've said that we've got to start driving our deficit numbers down.
The President. No, I--what I said was I haven't seen yet what provisions are in there. The bottom line is, is that I want to see health care, energy, education, and serious efforts to reduce our deficit--our budget deficit. And there are going to be a lot of details that are still being worked out, but I have confidence that we're going to be able to get a budget done that's reflective of what needs to happen in order to make sure that America grows.
Now, none of us know exactly what's going to happen 6 or 8 or 10 years from now. Here's what I do know: If we don't tackle energy, if we don't improve our education system, if we don't drive down the costs of health care, if we're not making serious investments in science and technology and our infrastructure, then we won't grow 2.6 percent, we won't grow 2.2 percent. We won't grow.
And so, what we're trying to emphasize is, let's make sure that we're making the investments that we need to grow, to meet those growth targets. At the same time, we're still reducing the deficit by a couple of trillion dollars; we are cutting out wasteful spending in areas like Medicare; we're changing procurement practices when it comes to the Pentagon budget; we are looking at social service programs and education programs that don't work and eliminate them. And we will continue to go line by line through this budget, and where we find programs that don't work we will eliminate them.
But I'm--look, I'm not going to lie to you, it is tough. As I said, that's why the critics tend to criticize, but they don't offer an alternative budget. Because even if we were not doing health care, we were not doing energy, we were not doing education, they'd still have a whole bunch of problems in those out-years, according to CBO projections. The only difference is that we will not have invested in what's necessary to make this economy grow.
We have to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century. And that's exactly what this budget begins to do. It contains new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses, and new savings that will bring down our deficit.
The President. All right. Okay. [Laughter] Surprised--I am surprised compared to where I started, when we first announced for this race, by the number of critical issues that appear to be coming to a head all at the same time. You know, when I first started this race, Iraq was a central issue, but the economy appeared on the surface to still be relatively strong. There were underlying problems that I was seeing with health care for families and our education system and college affordability and so forth, but, obviously, I didn't anticipate the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
This metaphor has been used before, but the ship of state is an ocean liner, it's not a speed boat. And so the way we are constantly thinking about this issue of how to bring about the changes that the American people need is to say, if we can move this big battleship a few degrees in a different direction, we may not see all the consequences of that change a week from now or 3 months from now, but 10 years from now or 20 years from now, our kids will be able to look back and say that was when we started getting serious about clean energy; that's when health care started to become more efficient and affordable; that's when we became serious about raising our standards in education.
We know these things, and hopefully, one of the benefits of the wonderful education that you've received here at Notre Dame is that you've had time to consider these wrongs in the world, perhaps recognized impulses in yourself that you want to leave behind. You've grown determined, each in your own way, to right them. And yet, one of the vexing things for those of us interested in promoting greater understanding and cooperation among people is the discovery that even bringing together persons of good will, bringing together men and women of principle and purpose, even accomplishing that can be difficult.
What bothered the doctor was an entry that my campaign staff had posted on my web site, an entry that said I would fight, quote, "right-wing ideologues who want to take away a woman's right to choose," unquote. The doctor said he had assumed I was a reasonable person, he supported my policy initiatives to help the poor and to lift up our educational system, but that if I truly believed that every pro-life individual was simply an ideologue who wanted to inflict suffering on women, then I was not very reasonable. He wrote, "I do not ask at this point that you oppose abortion, only that you speak about this issue in fair-minded words"--fair-minded words.
Now, you, class of 2009, are about to enter the next phase of your life at a time of great uncertainty. You'll be called to help restore a free market that's also fair to all who are willing to work. You'll be called to seek new sources of energy that can save our planet, to give future generations the same chance that you had to receive an extraordinary education. And whether as a person drawn to public service or simply someone who insists on being an active citizen, you will be exposed to more opinions and ideas broadcast through more means of communication than ever existed before. You'll hear talking heads scream on cable, and you'll read blogs that claim definitive knowledge, and you will watch politicians pretend they know what they're talking about. [Laughter] Occasionally, you may have the great fortune of actually seeing important issues debated by people who do know what they're talking about, by well-intentioned people with brilliant minds and mastery of the facts. In fact, I suspect that some of you will be among those brightest stars.
And so instead of doing all the talking, what I want to do is maybe just provide a few opening remarks and then basically have a conversation with you about things that are important to you and important to this community, important to this State. There is one thing I want to focus on, though, if you don't mind, in my opening remarks, and that's the issue of education. We have gone through obviously the toughest economic situation since the Great Depression, and no State has been untouched, no group of people has been untouched by the devastation. We lost 8 million jobs. The financial sector almost completely melted down. We almost slipped into a Great Depression. And so we acted very quickly to try to stop the bleeding.
Now, the truth of the matter is, we used to have by far the best education system in the world. We were the first nation in the world to have compulsory public education. And so as people were moving off the farms, moving into the cities, moving into industry, suddenly they were able to get the training and the skills they needed for an advanced industrial economy.
Even folks who didn't go to college still got a good education. My grandmother, she was an amazing woman. She passed away a couple of years ago. But she never went to college. She worked--when my grandfather went off to World War II, she worked on a assembly line making bombers. She was like Rosie the Riveter. And then when my grandfather came back, he got the GI bill to go to college, but she didn't get the GI bill, so she went to work. She started off as a secretary; she ended up as a vice president at a bank in Hawaii.
Well, now we rank 21st in science education in the world, and we rank 25th in math education in the world. So the trend line is that we're not at the top in terms of college graduates, we're not at the top at science, we're not at the top at math. We've got a third of our students who enroll who never graduate from high school. And all this means that not only is it bad for the young people who aren't getting this education--typically, a high school grad gets paid about $10,000 less than a college grad, and over the course of the lifetime, it means hundreds of thousand dollars in lost income--but it's also bad for the country as a whole because we don't have as many engineers, and we don't have as many scientists, we're not inventing the new products that are going to make all the difference in terms of how well we succeed.
So the reason I want to raise this is because there are a lot of issues we've been working on in Washington, a lot of them get a lot of attention, but something that hasn't gotten as much attention is what we've been trying to do working with States and local school districts over the last 2 years to make sure that we're moving in a new direction in improving our education system.
And as a consequence of this competition called Race to the Top--we had about $4 billion--we've ended up seeing 32 States change their laws to reform the system so that the whole education structure works better for our kids and makes it more accountable, and we start providing better training and better recruitment for our teachers and more professional development and additional resources.
So it's been a big boost for education all across the country, moving forward on a reform agenda that doesn't just dictate to States, here's how you have to do everything, but it says, here's some criteria for success; if you have a plan to match that, then we're going to help you. So that's number one.
Number two, we've been helping to make sure that more young people get early childhood education, because the studies show that if kids are well prepared when they get to school, then they are much likely to do better. If they know their colors and their numbers and their letters and they know how to sit still--I remember when Malia and Sasha were young; that was a key training point.
And so early childhood education is--when it's well designed, makes a big difference, and we've been doing that.
Third thing we've been doing is focusing on higher education. Now, it turns out that we've got--the lottery scholarship program here in New Mexico is terrific, but we've got a whole lot of States all across the country and a lot of young people who still rely on Pell grants and student loan programs in order to finance their overall education.
So there are a whole range of things that we're trying to do, working with colleges, community colleges, universities to try to improve our education system. One of the things that I announced this week was, we're really going to focus on science and math because that's where our young people, I think, are falling the most behind. And we've made a commitment that we're going to hire over the next couple of years 10,000 new science and math teachers. And we're going to work with the schools to help redesign their math and science curriculums so that we start boosting--I want to get to the point where we're number one in science and math.
Now, last point I'm going to make, and then I'm just going to open it up because I promised I wouldn't give a long speech: This election coming up in November is going to offer a choice on a whole range of different issues. And this issue of education gives you a sense of the choice that I think Democrats are trying to make and the choice that the Republicans are trying to make. The Republicans recently put out what they call their "Pledge to America." And it basically outlined what their priorities are.
That's their main economic plan. And when you ask them, "Well, how would you pay for some of this stuff?" they don't really have good answers. But one way they would pay for it is to cut back our education spending by 20 percent and eliminate about 200,000 Head Start programs and reduce student aid to go to college for about 8 million students.
That's one of their answers. And I just have to say, look, China, that's not the decision they're making about their education system and their kids. South Korea, that's not the decision that they're making about their kids.
I was in South Korea, and I was talking to the P resident, having lunch, and he said, you know, my biggest problem in education is, the parents are so demanding. They're insisting that I ship in English--people from the United States and other English-speaking countries because they want all their kids to learn English by the time they're in third grade.
I mean, that's the--that's their mindset. That's the competition that they're in. So they're not cutting back on education right when we know that that's going to be the most important thing in determining our success over the long term. And we can't either. And so I just want everybody to think about those kinds of issues as you go into the polling place in November: Who's going to prioritize our young people to make sure they've got the skills they need to succeed over the long term? Nothing's going to be more important in terms of our long-term success.
All right? So with that, let me just open it up to any comments or questions people may have about anything. I talked a lot about education, but people may have a whole bunch of different interests here, and I'd love to hear from you. And we've got mikes so that everybody can hear your questions, okay?
I know education is truly incredible, and it moves people beyond what we can ever expect, but if we don't have homes to go to, what good is the education?
Second question, we can't always depend on government to help us as far as education is concerned. I do think--my wife is a teacher in an elementary school--it all has to start at home. We as parents have to educate our children on how to get educated; it starts at home. And I want to thank you for everything you've done for public education. Thank you again. But we all have to understand it kind of starts at home, as parents.
One last point I'll make about veterans, because it ties in with the overall theme of education: Working with our terrific Members of Congress here, we were able to pass the post-9/11 GI bill, which means that this generation of veterans is going to be able to benefit the same way my grandfather benefited when he came back from World War II, that he was going to be able to get his college education paid for. And by the way, we made it transferable to the spouses of veterans and their family members if they weren't going to use it, because military families make huge sacrifices as well, and oftentimes they don't get the service and the attention that they need. And this has been a huge priority of the First Lady, and it's something that I am very, very proud of. But we've got to keep on fighting for these changes. They don't come by themselves.
And you got to ask yourselves, what direction do I want this country to go in? Do I want to invest in our people, in our middle class and making it stronger, and our infrastructure and our education system and clean energy? Is that one vision, or are we just going to keep on doing the same things that got us into this mess in the first place?
From the outset, my goal has been to significantly cut our domestic spending, but at the same time, make sure we're making key investments in things like education, infrastructure, innovation--the things that are going to help us win the future.
So I'm looking forward to having that conversation. But right now we've got some business in front of us that needs to be done, and that is, making sure that we are cutting spending in a significant way, but we're doing it with a scalpel instead of a machete to make sure that we can still make investments in education, we can still make investments in infrastructure, we can still make investments that put the American people back to work and build our economy for the long term.
So I asked Congress to send me a budget that makes some serious spending cuts, but still invests in things like clean energy, still invests in research, still invests in infrastructure, still invests in education--investments that are critical for us to be able to compete with any country in the world. That's what I asked for. I asked for it several months ago.
Like I said, we're not going to win the race just by driving our wages down, because we'll never win that race. I mean, China doesn't even have the lowest wages now. Some companies are now moving to the next country that's got lower wages than China, because China's economy is starting to grow. There's always going to be some country out there with lower wages. But we can outeducate anybody. And we used to have--we used to have the best education system in the world. We used to have the number-one percentage of college graduates in the world. We don't anymore. Our kids used to do the best on math and science exams; now we're like 9th, 12th, 21st. And that means that other countries are going to pass us by.
This is why even in these tough budget times, where we need to cut the things that we don't need, we can't stop investing in education. We can't stop investing in education. I put forward my budget proposal for next year, and almost every department I cut. One department I didn't cut: Education. I did not cut education; I actually increased our investment in education.
So what we've said is, yes, we're going to put more money in the schools, but we're also going to reform the schools. And part of the money that we've done is--what we've done is we've carved out some of this money, and we've said, instead of it just going to every school district based on some formula, we want you to compete for it. Come up with a plan explaining how you're going to reform our education system: how you're going to make sure there are high standards for every kid, how you're going to get the best teachers, how you're going to train and retain those teachers, how you're going to make sure that the schools are accountable. And if you do those things, we're going to give you a little bit of extra money. And it gives an incentive for every State and every school district to start looking at what they're doing to see if they're using the best practices possible to educate our kids. So that's on the K-through-12 level.
We also have to focus on community colleges, because that's--it's not just enough to have kids getting good educations. We have to have adults who are constantly retraining. I mean, how many here--how many folks here who are working at Gamesa took some sort of training class at a community college that helped them along the way? Anybody? Look at that. Right? So we've got a decent number of folks who, maybe you've got a career change, maybe your old skills are a little obsolete now, and you need to upgrade them. Well, you've got to be able to also get a good education. So that's why we're putting more money into community colleges as well as 4-year colleges. And what we've done is we've expanded the grant programs, the Pell grant, the student loan programs, so that more people can afford to go to college without getting huge debt, especially if you're working. And if you've already got a family, you can't afford to be taking out $50,000 worth of debt. So we want to give you more help.
And so we've been cutting in a whole bunch of areas, and we're consolidating some agencies and earmarks that are not necessary, and we're looking at the Pentagon--how do we make our defense spending smarter and better? And so we're going to be doing a lot of consolidation and cuts, but one thing we can't do is stop investing in education, in research, in infrastructure, in things like a smart grid. Those are the things that are going to make us competitive over the long term.
And day by day, week by week, year by year, we slowly make more and more progress. On education, we're not going to transform all the schools overnight. Too many kids are going to be dropping out. Too many kids are going to be ranking too low on international standards on math and science. But if we improve those schools each year, then slowly but surely our whole workforce gets better.
Mr. Romney's primary approach is cutting taxes, particularly for the wealthiest Americans, rolling back regulations that constrain insurance companies, big polluters, or the banks from taking advantage of consumers and families. His premise is that the market will take care of everything else. I believe the way we're going to grow a strong economy for everybody is investing in education, making college more affordable, investing in basic science and research so we keep our technological edge, balancing our budget in a responsible way so that we're asking the wealthiest Americans to do a little bit more even as we're cutting out programs that don't work, making sure that we continue to provide people who work hard the chance to get affordable health care. All those things contribute to a strong middle class.

Whether it's on wind energy or how we would approach funding education, those are the topics that we're spending a lot of time talking about in the campaign.

Now, obviously, the Republicans have voted that down already once. It's not likely, realistically, that they're going to bring it back up again before election day. But my hope is, after the election, people will step back and recognize that that's a sensible way to bring down our deficit and allow us to still invest in things like education that are going to help the economy grow.

THE PRESIDENT: I wasn't familiar that they were taking the trip. My understanding is I think they went through a group that organizes these educational trips down to Cuba. This is not something the White House was involved with. We've got better things to do.
Keep in mind in terms of reopening the government, what Democrats have already said they're willing to do is to vote for reopening the government at funding levels that the Republicans have established and that the Democrats don't like. So if -- if John Boehner puts the Senate bill on the floor right now, that maintains the status quo. It doesn't increase government spending beyond where it already is. It's far short of what Democrats think are necessary for us to invest in things like education and research and development and -- and all the things that are important.
THE PRESIDENT: The-- I'll-- I'll get to that. Equal pay for equal work. We care about that bill. Republicans, that's not their priority. We think it's important to make sure that issues like family leave and-- and family-friendly policies and-- and more effective childcare in place, so that-- so that folks are getting help, that-- young people are getting more assistance, when it comes to, paying for college educations, rebuilding our infrastructure, putting folks back to work on our roads, our bridges, all of which would boost our economy now and boost it into the future.
And that's what we should keep in mind when we think about what's going to take us forward: not down a path where we slow down businesses by slashing investments in the future; not a path where we put our economy at risk again with Government shutdowns or fiscal shutdowns; not down a path where just a few of us do spectacularly well and folks who are working hard see their incomes, their wages, their financial security erode. We need to go forward to an economy that's generating rising incomes and chances for everybody who is willing to work hard; on that continued advance where we invest in our future, give working Americans the tools they need to determine their own fate—research, education, infrastructure, job training.
Investments in education would be cut to their lowest levels since 2000—15 years ago—at a time when we know we need to be upping our game in education because of competition around the world: 157,000 fewer children would have the chance to get early education through Head Start; more than 8 million low-income students would see their financial aid cut. Investments in job training would be cut to the point where more than 4 million fewer workers would have the chance to earn higher wages through programs to help them upgrade their skills. We would end partnerships that help 30,000 small manufacturers grow their businesses and create good jobs, including right here in Cleveland.
And at a time of new and evolving threats overseas, the Republican budget, despite all the talk they have about national security, would actually cut our core national security funding to its lowest level in a decade. And still, those at the top aren't asked to sacrifice a single dime. So lower taxes for the most well off, higher taxes for working families; gutted investments in education, job training, infrastructure, military, and our national security; kicking tens of millions of Americans off their health insurance; ending Medicare as we know it.
Middle class economics means preparing Americans to earn higher wages down the road. That's why my budget makes new investments from pre-K to midcareer job training. I want to make sure all our kids get a great education from the earliest age and that young people can afford to go to college without getting buried under a mountain of debt.
My question is regarding the community college initiative and how it affects the middle class. I think that some of our community colleges here in Cleveland, as well as across the country, they get a bad reputation that they don't provide a high-quality education, which I believe that they do. How can we better convey a message to all of our constituents and possible future community college-enrolled students, how can we convey the message that the community college does have a high-quality education and we can prepare our kids?
The President. Well, I tell you what, I'm doing my darnedest to advertise. Because one of our greatest comparative advantages is our higher education system here in the United States. Obviously, we've got the best universities in the world, and people flock from everywhere to try to get an education. But we also have an unparalleled community college system. And there are places like Lorraine that are doing great work.
The challenge we've got is that they're underutilized. Oftentimes, we're not linking what community college is doing with high schools, on the one hand, and 4-year universities and businesses, on the other. So part of our initiative is not just to make the first 2 years of community college free, because not everybody needs a 4-year education. Some people may be interested in graphic design or interested in manufacturing processes or even, in some cases, high-tech jobs that don't require a 4-year degree, but they do require some advanced training. And if they can get that first 2 years free without debt, plugged into a business, they've saved money. They don't have all those student loans to pay. They can work for a time, learn more in their career. Then, maybe they go back and decide to get a higher degree.
So we invest in early childhood education. We invest additional job training dollars. We make sure that we've got a strong research and development strategy so that we continue to innovate. Rebuilding our infrastructure, which we know will attract businesses.

Then you look at the recently released Republican budget, which keeps in place a sequester — a law that is slashing both defense and non-defense spending — so that we would end up seeing hundreds of thousands of young people having less money for student loans. We would see early childhood education slots slashed. We would see the elimination of the Affordable Care Act, of course, which would mean not only that millions of people are losing health care coverage, but folks who have health care coverage — 130 million of them — would no longer be protected against discrimination because of pre-existing conditions. Four million seniors would suddenly be paying higher prescription drug prices.

The President: I will not, and I've been very clear. We are not going to have a situation where, for example, our education spending goes back to its lowest level since the year 2000 — since 15 years ago — despite a larger population and more kids to educate. We would be spending less per pupil than we did back in 2000, at a time when, 15 years later, we know that the single most important thing in terms of how well we can compete around the world is the quality of our workforce. We can't do that to our kids, and I'm not going to sign it.

The Recovery Act, which everybody has forgotten about, which helped saved the economy and prevented us going into the Great Depression, was the largest investment in green technology, the largest investment in education. We rebuilt roads and bridges. It was larger by a significant margin than the New Deal in real dollars and put us on a pathway for clean energy development, put us on a pathway for electronic medical records. All kinds of stuff that people forgot about.

By hook or by crook, we're going to make sure that when I leave this office, that the country is more prosperous, more people have opportunity, kids have a better education, we're more competitive, climate change is being taken more seriously than it was, and we are actually trying to do something about it. Those are going to be the measures by which I look back and say whether I've been successful as president.

And that accumulated and built up. And over time, people with less and less resources, more and more strains—because it's hard being poor. People don't like being poor. And it's time-consuming, it's stressful. It's hard. And so over time, families frayed. Men who could not get jobs left. Mothers who are single are not able to read as much to their kids. So all that was happening 40 years ago to African Americans. And now what we're seeing is that those same trends have accelerated, and they're spreading to the broader community. But the pattern that, Bob, you're recording in some of your stories is no different when—than what William Julius Wilson was talking about when he talked about the truly disadvantaged. So I say all this—and I know that was not an answer to your question. [Laughter] I will be willing to answer it, but I think it is important for us at the outset to acknowledge, if in fact we are going to find common ground, then we also have to acknowledge that there are certain investments we are willing to make as a society, as a whole: in public schools and public universities; in, today, I believe early childhood education; in making sure that economic opportunity is available in communities that are isolated; and that somebody can get a job; and that there's actually a train that takes folks to where the jobs are; that broadband lines are in rural communities and not just in cities. And those things are not going to happen through market forces alone.
For most of the 20th century, all Americans of all walks of life thought that part of an—getting a good education was getting soft skills: not just reading, writing, arithmetic, but cooperation and teamwork and so on. And part of that was that everybody in the country got free access to extracurricular activities——
And that is not something that—for me to have that conversation does not negate my conversation about the need for early childhood education or the need for job training or the need for greater investment in infrastructure or jobs in low-income communities. So look, I'll talk till you're blue in the face about hard-nosed, economic macroeconomic policies, but in the meantime, I've got a bunch of kids right now who are graduating, and I want to give them some sense that they can have an impact on their immediate circumstances and the joys of fatherhood.
And that's why I think a lot of people are resistant to it and are skeptical of that conversation. And I guess what I'm saying is that, guarding against cynicism, what we should say is, we are going to argue hard for those public investments. We're going to argue hard for early childhood education because, by the way, if a young kid—3, 4 years old—is hearing a lot of words, the science tells us that they're going to be more likely to succeed at school. And if they've got trained and decently paid teachers in that preschool, then they're actually going to get—by the time they're in third grade, they'll be reading at grade level.
And that's where we, as a society, have the capacity to make a real difference. But it will cost us some money. It will cost us some money. It's not free. You look at a State like California that used to have, by far, the best public higher education system in the world, and there is a direct correlation between Proposition 13 and the slow disinvestment in the public university system, so that it became very, very expensive. And kids got priced out of the market, or they started taking on a whole bunch of debt. Now, that was a public policy choice, based on folks not wanting to pay property taxes. And that's true in cities and counties and States all across the country. And that's really a big part of our political argument.
When I, for example, make an argument about closing the carried interest loophole that exists whereby hedge fund managers are paying 15 percent on the fees and income that they collect, I've been called Hitler for doing this, or at least, this is like Hitler going into Poland. That's an actual quote from a hedge fund manager when I made that recommendation. The top 25 hedge fund managers made more than all the kindergarten teachers in the country. So I'm not—when I say that, I'm not saying that because I dislike hedge fund managers or I think they're evil. I'm saying that you're paying a lower rate than a lot of folks who are making $300,000 a year. You've—you pretty much have more than you'll ever be able to use and your family will ever be able to use. There's a fairness issue involved here. And by the way, if we were able to close that loophole, I can now invest in early childhood education that will make a difference. That's where the rubber hits the road.
So, my question is, given the fact that, right now in the world, most of the main causes of death, such as heart disease or chronic lower respiratory disease, diabetes, or even clandestine abortion in Argentina, can be prevented with a proper health education, climate change policies, and of course, medical research. So which ones do you think are, in these 7 years now as President of the United States, your greatest achievements in terms of those issues?
So part of the effort has to be how do we bring—private sector businesses attract investment into those communities to create jobs. That's point number one. But the businesses may not come unless the government has built the infrastructure: the roads or the Wi-Fi connections or what have you. So the government has to make an investment. And even if the businesses and the government are prepared to do what they need to do, the human capital—the people—they have to make sure that they're getting the education that they need, the training that they need.
And I said this to President Castro in Cuba. I said, look, you've made great progress in educating young people. Every child in Cuba gets a basic education. That's a huge improvement from where it was. Medical care: The life expectancy of Cubans is equivalent to the United States, despite it being a very poor country, because they have access to health care. That's a huge achievement. They should be congratulated. But you drive around Havana and you say, this economy is not working. It looks like it did in the 1950s. And so you have to be practical in asking yourself how can you achieve the goals of equality and inclusion, but also recognize that the market system produces a lot of wealth and goods and services and innovation. And it also gives individuals freedom because they have initiative.
And they see some of the global trends that you probably see here in Argentina, which is globalization is disruptive, and the days are over where you get a job and you stay in it for 30 years or 40 years and then you retire and you have a pension and it's all simple. Now, you might have a job for 5 years, and then the company closes and you've got to retrain, and you've got to go to another job, and you're trying to figure out how to save to pay for your child's education, while this—you're also trying to save for retirement.
The President. That's interesting. Well, every country has strengths and weaknesses. I will say that's an area where the United States—I'd like us to do better is greater awareness of the world outside of the United States. And part of this is just history. America was so big and relatively protected from threats from other countries. And it was able to develop its own internal market, and so for a long time, in some ways, America didn't feel as if it needed to know what was really going on outside. It's part of the reason why we don't do as well on foreign languages compared to a lot of other countries with the kind of educational levels.
I know that sometimes the news feeds cynicism and democracy at this moment seems particularly frustrating. But each and every day, I see lawyers not that much older than you who are helping young people get an education, are making sure that consumers are protected, are helping to keep America safe, are ensuring that our health care system works for everybody, are helping to preserve the planet and fight against climate change. It is remarkable what you can do with your talents. And it doesn't always get a lot of publicity, but you can make a really meaningful difference.
So one of the reasons I wanted to come back is to recruit you—[laughter]—to stay engaged, get involved, make a difference. It doesn't mean you have to run for office. It doesn't mean you even have to work for government. There are a lot of ways of serving. But I do hope that one of the things that you will take away from our discussion today and your extraordinary education here at the University of Chicago is the incredible high that you can get from serving this country.
And so it has—it's been rare—and this is by design—that the Court engages in massive social engineering. Now, I care deeply about—there are a whole range of progressive causes that I will continue to fight for as long as I have a breath. I believe in a society that is doing something about climate change in an aggressive way. I believe in a society that—in which every child is able to get a decent education and opportunity. I believe that everybody should have health care in a society that's wealthy; it's not a privilege, it's a right. I believe that our criminal justice system is flawed in a whole range of ways.
One exception has been this growing interest, this movement in criminal justice reform. And it's bipartisan, and it's sincere on the part of all sides on this. And it's an interesting convergence. You have fiscal conservatives who have been seeing how expensive it is to incarcerate people year after year after year and how it's breaking the bank, particularly at the State level, where if you track spending on public education and spending on incarceration over the last 20, 25, 30 years, there is almost a direct line between more people in jail and less support for public universities, for example. So there's a fiscal concern.
The President. Short answer is, no, I don't. The cleavages inside the Democratic Party are not comparable to what we're seeing in the Republican Party right now. The argument inside the Democratic Party is a little bit more about means, less about ends. If you look at our two Democratic candidates, they believe that everybody should get health care. They believe that every child should get a good education. They believe that climate change is real and that we should do something about it. They believe in equality for the LGBT community. Right? I mean, if you go through the list, there's not a huge divergence there.
But that's the story that's been told. And I'm here to say, Elkhart, 7½ years since I first came here, we've got to challenge the assumptions behind this economic story. And the reason is, it has ended up dividing Americans who actually have common economic interests and should be working together for a better deal from the people who serve them. And it's made people cynical about government, and it's kept working families from pushing our political system to actually address our economic challenges in a realistic way. Families of all races and all backgrounds deserve higher wages. Families of all races and all backgrounds deserve quality health care and decent retirement savings. Every child in this country deserves an education that lets them dream bigger than the circumstances in which they're born.
Priority number two: We need to better prepare our children and our workers for the high-tech, high-wage jobs of tomorrow. Now, we actually know what works here, we just don't do it. We know early childhood education works. And we should invest in smart ways of doing it across the country, especially because childcare costs take up a huge share of a family budget. We know that we have to make college more affordable and job training more available. And one way to do that is to provide 2 years of community college for free for every responsible student. There are mayors and there are Governors who are already doing good work on these issues across party lines. They've shown the way. Now we need Congress to do the same.
But I've got to say, the folks on the other side of the aisle have opposed our efforts to close these loopholes. How do they explain it? When big corporations and wealthy individuals don't pay their fair share of taxes—and by the way, a lot of people do, so I'm not painting with a broad brush here, but there are a lot of folks who don't—when they don't pay their fair share of taxes, it means either you're paying more or it means we don't have enough revenue to support things like rebuilding our roads or funding our public universities, which means tuition goes up, and then you're trying to figure out how to pay for your kid's college education. We should have closed these loopholes a long time ago, and Lord knows, I have tried every year in my budget. We should have used some of the savings that we get from them paying their fair share to give tax breaks that would actually help working families pay for childcare or would help you send your kids to college or would help you save for retirement.
The President. ——then the debate—then, if that's what you're concerned about—the economy—the debate is not even close. One path would lead to lower wages. It would eliminate worker protections. It would cut investments in things like education. It would weaken the safety net. It would kick people off health insurance. It would let China write the rules for the global economy. It would let Big Oil weaken rules that protect our air and water. It would let big banks weaken rules that protect families from getting cheated. It would cut taxes for the wealthiest Americans to historic lows. Those are the facts. And I know it sounds like a strange agenda for politicians who are claiming to care about you and working families. But those are their plans. You can find it on their websites. And when I hear working families thinking about voting for those plans, then I want to have an intervention. [Laughter] I want you to just take a look at what you're talking about here.
You add all those things together, and people then start feeling more stressed. Now, the answer to that is how do we get wages up? How do we make sure that you can save for retirement? How can you make sure that your kid can afford to get a higher education to compete for the jobs of the future? And the question then is, what is actually going to get that done?
Ms. Ifill. Well, you mentioned education, you touched on education. We have a question here about that. What's your name?
The—well, first of all, let me just say that I am—I have been emphasizing STEM education—that's science, technology, engineering, and math—not because I think the humanities are unimportant, but because we generally are—have not been producing as many engineers and as many scientists as—and people with those kinds of technological skills as compared to China, for example. And we send a lot of people into banking and folks like me, who become lawyers, but the truth of the matter is, is that we have to make sure that we continue to have a strong base in the sciences and engineering if we're going to remain the most innovative economy in the world. But as somebody who studied humanities himself, I think it's extremely important as well.
The broader issue of financing education, as I mentioned, the reason that college is so much more expensive for this generation as it was for my generation, and even better for the previous generation, really had to do with government spending. It used to be that most State universities were heavily subsidized by the State so they kept tuition really, really low.
What happened around the eighties, nineties was, State legislators started saying, we've got to build more prisons. In fairness to them, they also started feeling more pressure because of Medicaid spending, because health care costs were going up. And so they started cutting higher education budgets, and they made up for it with higher tuition. And that's why, at least at public colleges and universities, the costs have gone up a lot.
And for some people who decide they don't need a 4-year college education—they want to be a graphic designer, they want to go into a trade—now they can get the training they need without incurring any debt. So these are all proposals that are—we know work. There are some States and cities that are already doing this to—free community college proposal, and it's working, and it's really helping to reduce costs.
The truth is, on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives – on health care and education and the economy – Senator McCain has been anything but independent. He said that our economy has made "great progress" under this President. He said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong. And when one of his chief advisors – the man who wrote his economic plan – was talking about the anxiety Americans are feeling, he said that we were just suffering from a "mental recession," and that we've become, and I quote, "a nation of whiners."
Now, I don't believe that Senator McCain doesn't care what's going on in the lives of Americans. I just think he doesn't know. Why else would he define middle-class as someone making under five million dollars a year? How else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million Americans? How else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people's benefits, or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college, or a plan that would privatize Social Security and gamble your retirement?
Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves – protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology.
Now is the time to finally meet our moral obligation to provide every child a world-class education, because it will take nothing less to compete in the global economy. Michelle and I are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education. And I will not settle for an America where some kids don't have that chance. I'll invest in early childhood education. I'll recruit an army of new teachers, and pay them higher salaries and give them more support. And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability. And we will keep our promise to every young American – if you commit to serving your community or your country, we will make sure you can afford a college education.
Because we know education is the single best bet we can make to change the odds of our children and our cities, we are making the largest investment in education in our Nation's history. It will prevent harmful education cuts and save jobs of tens of thousands of teachers, 14,000 just in New York City. And it will make a historic investment in early childhood education and upgrade classrooms and libraries and labs across America so that millions of our children are prepared to compete in the 21st century.
For we know that economic progress and educational achievement have always gone hand in hand in America. The land-grant colleges and public high schools transformed the economy of an industrializing nation. The GI bill generated a middle class that made America's economy unrivaled in the 20th century. Investments in math and science under President Eisenhower gave new opportunities to young scientists and engineers all across the country. It made possible somebody like a Sergey Brin to attend graduate school and found an upstart company called Google that would forever change our world.
The source of America's prosperity has never been merely how ably we accumulate wealth, but how well we educate our people. This has never been more true than it is today. In a 21st century world where jobs can be shipped wherever there's an Internet connection, where a child born in Dallas is now competing with a child in New Delhi, where your best job qualification is not what you do, but what you know, education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity and success, it's a prerequisite for success.
That's why workers without a 4-year degree have borne the brunt of recent layoffs, Latinos most of all. That's why, of the 30 fastest growing occupations in America, half require a bachelor's degree or more. By 2016, 4 out of every 10 new jobs will require at least some advanced education or training.
So let there be no doubt: The future belongs to the nation that best educates its citizens. And my fellow Americans, we have everything we need to be that nation. We have the best universities, the most renowned scholars. We have innovative principals and passionate teachers and gifted students, and we have parents whose only priority is their child's education. We have a legacy of excellence and an unwavering belief that our children should climb higher than we did.
And yet, despite resources that are unmatched anywhere in the world, we've let our grades slip, our schools crumble, our teacher quality fall short, and other nations outpace us. Let me give you a few statistics. In eighth grade math, we've fallen to ninth place. Singapore's middle schoolers outperform ours three to one. Just a third of our 13- and 14-year-olds can read as well as they should. And year after year, a stubborn gap persists between how well white students are doing compared to their African American and Latino classmates. The relative decline of American education is untenable for our economy, it's unsustainable for our democracy, it's unacceptable for our children, and we can't afford to let it continue.
What's at stake is nothing less than the American Dream. It's what drew my father and so many of your fathers and mothers to our shores in pursuit of an education. It's what led Linda Brown and Gonzalo and Felicitas Mendez to bear the standard of all who were attending separate and unequal schools. It's what has led generations of Americans to take on that extra job, to sacrifice the small pleasures, to scrimp and save wherever they can, in hopes of putting away enough, just enough, to give their child the education that they never had. It's that most American of ideas, that with the right education, a child of any race, any faith, any station, can overcome whatever barriers stand in their way and fulfill their God-given potential.
For decades, Washington has been trapped in the same stale debates that have paralyzed progress and perpetuated our educational decline. Too many supporters of my party have resisted the idea of rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, even though we know it can make a difference in the classroom. Too many in the Republican Party have opposed new investments in early education, despite compelling evidence of its importance. So what we get here in Washington is the same old debate about it's more money versus more reform, vouchers versus the status quo. There's been partisanship and petty bickering, but little recognition that we need to move beyond the worn fights of the 20th century if we're going to succeed in the 21st century.
I think you'd all agree that the time for finger-pointing is over. The time for holding us--holding ourselves accountable is here. What's required is not simply new investments, but new reforms. It is time to expect more from our students. It's time to start rewarding good teachers, stop making excuses for bad ones. It's time to demand results from government at every level. It's time to prepare every child, everywhere in America, to outcompete any worker, anywhere in the world. It's time to give all Americans a complete and competitive education from the cradle up through a career. We've accepted failure for far too long. Enough is enough. America's entire education system must once more be the envy of the world, and that's exactly what we intend to do.
That's exactly what the budget I'm submitting to Congress has begun to achieve. Now, at a time when we've inherited a trillion-dollar deficit, we will start by doing a little housekeeping, going through our books, cutting wasteful education programs. My outstanding Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, who's here today--stand up, Arne, so everybody can see you. I'm assuming you also saw my Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. But Secretary Duncan will use only one test when deciding what ideas to support with your precious tax dollars: It's not whether an idea is liberal or conservative, but whether it works. And this will help free up resources for the first pillar of reforming our schools, investing in early childhood initiatives.
This isn't just about keeping an eye on our children, it's about educating them. Studies show that children in early childhood education programs are more likely to score higher in reading and math, more likely to graduate from high school and attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job. For every dollar we invest in these programs, we get nearly $10 back in reduced welfare rolls, fewer health care costs, and less crime. That's why the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that I signed into law invests $5 billion in growing Early Head Start and Head Start, expanding access to quality childcare for 150,000 more children from working families and doing more for children with special needs. And that's why we are going to offer 55,000 first-time parents regular visits from trained nurses to help make sure their children are healthy and prepare them for school and for life.
Now, even as we invest in early childhood education, let's raise the bar for early learning programs that are falling short. Now, today, some children are enrolled in excellent programs, some children are enrolled in mediocre programs, and some are wasting away their most formative years in bad programs. That includes the one-fourth of all children who are Hispanic, and who will drive America's workforce of tomorrow, but who are less likely to have been enrolled in an early childhood education program than anyone else.
So that's the first pillar of our education reform agenda. The second, we will end what has become a race to the bottom in our schools and instead spur a race to the top by encouraging better standards and assessments. Now, this is an area where we are being outpaced by other nations. It's not that their kids are any smarter than ours, it's that they are being smarter about how to educate their children. They're spending less time teaching things that don't matter and more time teaching things that do. They're preparing their students not only for high school or college, but for a career; we are not. Our curriculum for eighth graders is two full years behind top performing countries. That's a prescription for economic decline. And I refuse to accept that America's children cannot rise to this challenge. They can, and they must, and they will meet higher standards in our time.
That's inexcusable. That's why I'm calling on States that are setting their standards far below where they ought to be to stop low-balling expectations for our kids. The solution to low test scores is not lowering standards, it's tougher, clearer standards. Standards like those in Massachusetts, where eighth graders are--[applause]--we've got the Massachusetts contingent here--[laughter]--in Massachusetts, eighth graders are now tying for first, first in the whole world in science. Other forward-thinking States are moving in the same direction by coming together as part of a consortium. And more States need to do the same. And I'm calling on our Nation's Governors and State education chiefs to develop standards and assessments that don't simply measure whether students can fill in a bubble on a test, but whether they possess 21st century skills like problem-solving and critical thinking and entrepreneurship and creativity.
Of course, raising standards alone will not make much of a difference unless we provide teachers and principals with the information they need to make sure students are prepared to meet those standards. And far too few States have data systems like the one in Florida that keep track of a student's education from childhood through college. And far too few districts are emulating the example of Houston and Long Beach and using data to track how much progress a student is making and where that student is struggling. That's a resource that can help us improve student achievement and tell us which students had which teachers so we can assess what's working and what's not. That's why we're making a major investment in this area, that we will cultivate a new culture of accountability in America's schools.
Now, that leads me to the fourth part of America's education strategy, promoting innovation and excellence in America's schools. One of the places where much of that innovation occurs is in our most effective charter schools. And these are public schools founded by parents, teachers, and civic or community organizations with broad leeway to innovate, schools I supported as a State legislator and a United States Senator.
Of course, no matter how innovative our schools or how effective our teachers, America cannot succeed unless our students take responsibility for their own education. That means showing up for school on time, paying attention in class, seeking out extra tutoring if it's needed, staying out of trouble. To any student who's watching, I say this: Don't even think about dropping out of school. Don't even think about it.
So today I'm issuing a challenge to educators and lawmakers, parents and teachers alike: Let us all make turning around our schools our collective responsibility as Americans. And that will require new investments in innovative ideas. That's why my budget invests in developing new strategies to make sure at-risk students don't give up on their education, new efforts to give dropouts who want to return to school the help they need to graduate, and new ways to put those young men and women who have left school back on a pathway to graduation.
Now, the fifth part of America's education strategy is providing every American with a quality higher education, whether it's college or technical training. Never has a college degree been more important; never has it been more expensive. And at a time when so many of our families are bearing enormous economic burdens, the rising cost of tuition threatens to shatter dreams. And that's why we will simplify Federal college assistance forms so it doesn't take a Ph.D. to apply for financial aid.
In just a single generation, America has fallen from 2d place to 11th place in the portion of students completing college. That is unfortunate, but it's by no means irreversible. With resolve and the right investments, we can retake the lead once more. And that's why, in my address to the Nation the other week, I called on Americans to commit to at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020. And to meet that goal, we are investing $2.5 billion to identify and support innovative initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students persist and graduate.
So let's not stop at education with college. Let's recognize a 21st century reality: Learning doesn't end in our early twenties. Adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees and new skills, especially in the current economic environment. And that means working with all our universities and schools, including community colleges--a great and undervalued asset--to prepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries and to improve access to job training not only for young people who are just starting their careers, but for older workers who need new skills to change careers. And that's going to be one of the key tasks that Secretary Solis is involved with, is making sure that lifelong learning is a reality and a possibility for more Americans.
It's through initiatives like these that we'll see more Americans earn a college degree or receive advanced training and pursue a successful career. And that's why I'm calling on Congress to work with me to enact these essential reforms and to reauthorize the Workforce Reinvestment Act. That's how we will round out a complete and competitive education in the United States of America.
You know, when you're a kid you don't think about the sacrifices they're making. She had to work; I just had to go to school. But she'd still wake up every day to make sure I was getting what I needed for my education. And it's because she did this day after day, week after week, because of all the other opportunities and breaks that I got along the way, all the sacrifices that my grandmother and my grandfather made along the way, that I can stand here today as President of the United States. It's because of the sacrifices--[applause]. See, I want every child in this country to have the same chance that my mother gave me, that my teachers gave me, that my college professors gave me, that America gave me.
It was heartbreaking that a girl so full of promise was so full of worry that she and her class titled their video, "Is Anybody Listening?" So today there's something I want to say to Yvonne and her class at Village Academy: I am listening; we are listening; America is listening. And we will not rest until your parents can keep your jobs--we will not rest until your parents can keep their jobs and your families can keep their homes, and you can focus on what you should be focusing on, your own education; until you can become the businessmen, doctors, and lawyers of tomorrow, until you can reach out and grasp your dreams for the future.
We've got to put our growth model on a different footing, and that means that we've got to deal with our health care system and reduce costs for families, businesses, and governments. It means that we have to think through our energy policy so that we're not so badly dependent on foreign oil. It means we've got to improve our education system so that our young people are equipped with the skills and knowledge that they're going to need to get jobs in the future.
And on education, how do we build on the reforms that we talked about during the campaign and that are funded, at least temporarily, through the stimulus package. And I gave a major speech on education priorities yesterday.
And so part of what I think every State should be doing right now is figuring out, A, how do we invest in our people so that we're attracting world-class businesses who are looking for world-class employees? I think getting K-12 education right, not short-changing higher education, I think those things are absolutely critical; thinking about where can--where do strategic infrastructure investments make sense. You know, if you think about the Midwest, one of the problems is, is that--this is my stenographer. She just wants to make sure that I'm not tripping over myself.
My goal here is to create laboratories of innovation so that in the public school system, we are on a race to the top as opposed to stuck in the old ways of doing things. And we've got to; we've got to do that. In your home town of Cleveland, I don't know off the top of my head what the dropout rate is, but I've got to assume that it's hovering around 50 percent. If you look at the number of children going through the Cleveland public schools who are actually prepared to go to college, it's probably 1 out of 7 or 8 or 10. And that's just not acceptable. It's not acceptable for them; it's not acceptable in terms of America's economic future. And so we've got to experiment with ways to provide a better educational experience for our kids, and some charters are doing outstanding jobs. So the bottom line is to try to create innovation within the public school system that can potentially be scaled up, but also to make sure that we are maintaining very high standards for any charter school that's created.
Here's what we do, though, we say that on health care, energy, and education, it's time for us to make investments that had been put off for decades and had made us less competitive. And every dime of increased spending that we include in those areas we offset either with additional revenues or with cuts, and we cut a lot of stuff.
And on education, if we're pricing people out of the college market, if nobody wants to teach because teachers don't get paid much, if we're not investing in early childhood education, if we're not investing in science and technology, then we're going to fall behind.
The other message, though, is that there are no shortcuts to long-term economic growth, and we can't just keep on doing the same things that we were doing before and somehow expect that all our problems are going to be solved. We've got to tackle some of these things like health care, energy, and education that have been put off for too long.
Sonia's parents came to New York from Puerto Rico during Second World War, her mother as part of the Women's Army Corps. And, in fact, her mother is here today, and I'd like us all to acknowledge Sonia's mom. Sonia's mom has been a little choked up. [Laughter] But she, Sonia's mother, began a family tradition of giving back to this country. Sonia's father was a factory worker with a third grade education who didn't speak English. But like Sonia's mother, he had a willingness to work hard, a strong sense of family, and a belief in the American Dream.
When Sonia was 9, her father passed away, and her mother worked 6 days a week as a nurse to provide for Sonia and her brother, who is also here today, is a doctor and a terrific success in his own right. But Sonia's mom bought the only set of encyclopedias in the neighborhood, sent her children to a Catholic school called Cardinal Spellman, out of a belief that with a good education here in America all things are possible.
And finally, we will begin a national campaign to promote cybersecurity awareness and digital literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms and to build a digital workforce for the 21st century. And that's why we're making a new commitment to education in math and science and historic investments in science and research and development. Because it's not enough for our children and students to master today's technologies--social networking and e-mailing and texting and blogging--we need them to pioneer the technologies that will allow us to work effectively through these new media and allow us to prosper in the future. So these are the things we will do.
One of the things that I've learned in education in the last 20 years is that the system is not broken. And it bothers me when I hear politicians, and even my President, say that our educational system is broken. Not to insult you, but----
I completely agree with you that there is a lot of good stuff going on in American education. The problem is, is that it's uneven. And, well, let me put it this way. There are actually two problems. In some places, it is completely broken. In some urban communities, where you've got 50 percent of the kids dropping out, you only have 1 out of every 10 children who are graduating at grade level, this system is broken for them.
It used to be by a pretty sizable factor: We had the highest high school graduation rates; we had the highest college graduation rates; we had the highest number of Ph.D.s, the highest number of engineers and scientists. We used to be head and shoulders above other countries when it came to education. We aren't anymore. We're sort of in the middle of the pack now among wealthy, advanced, industrialized countries.
So here's the bottom line: We've got to improve; we've got to step up our game, which brings me to the next point in your question, which is, how do we do that? I agree with you that if all we're doing is spreading around a lot of standardized tests and teaching to the test, that's not improving our education system. All right?
And so there's a saying in Illinois I learned when I was down in a lot of rural communities. They said, "Just weighing a pig doesn't fatten it." [Laughter] You can weigh it all the time, but it's not making the hog fatter. So the point being, if we're--all we're doing is testing and then teaching to the test, that doesn't assure that we're actually improving educational outcomes.
Now, the key point I want to make is this: We should focus on what works, based on good data. And Arne Duncan, my Secretary of Education, this guy is just obsessed with improving our education system. He is focused a hundred percent on it, and he is completely committed to teachers. He--we think that teachers are the most important ingredient in good schools. We're going to do whatever works to help teachers do a better job. We're going to eliminate those things that don't help teachers do a good job. Some of it is going to require more money, so in our Recovery Act, we had more money for improving curriculums, teacher training, recruitment, a lot of these things. But you can't just put more money without reform, and so some of it is demanding more accountability and more reform.
There's one other ingredient, though, and that is parents. We've got to have parents putting more emphasis on education with our kids. That's how we're all going to be able to pick up our game.
Some of it is that I have proposed some investments in education and in energy and in health information technologies. But there was just an article in the New York Times yesterday that showed that all that stuff, everything that I've proposed--my stimulus package, what we've done in terms of bailing out the financial system, all that stuff--that accounts for maybe 7, 8 percent of what you've seen in terms of increased debt and deficits. The real problem is Medicaid and Medicare. That's the nightmare scenario. If we can bend the curve, the cost curve down so that health care inflation is no more than ordinary inflation, it's matching up with the amount of increases that you're seeing on your paychecks, in your wages and your incomes, then we're going to be okay. And if I--we don't get a handle on it, we're not going to be okay. It doesn't matter, you know, that we eliminate earmarks or do all that other stuff. That won't make any difference; we'll still be consumed by huge debt for the next generation.
I hope you don't mind, I want to go into a little detail here about education. In the 21st century, when so many jobs will require a bachelor's degree or more, when countries that outeducate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, a world-class education is a prerequisite for success.
There's no two ways about it. There's no way to avoid it. You know what I'm talking about. There's a reason the story of the civil rights movement was written in our schools. There's a reason Thurgood Marshall took up the cause of Linda Brown. There's a reason why the Little Rock Nine defied a Governor and a mob. It's because there is no stronger weapon against inequality and no better path to opportunity than an education that can unlock a child's God-given potential.
And yet more than half a century after Brown v. Board, the dream of a world-class education is still being deferred all across the country. African American students are lagging behind White classmates in reading and math, an achievement gap that is growing in States that once led the way in the civil rights movement. Over half of all African American students are dropping out of school in some places. There are overcrowded classrooms and crumbling schools and corridors of shame in America filled with poor children, not just Black children, Brown and White children as well.
The state of our schools is not an African American problem; it is an American problem, because if Black and Brown children cannot compete, then America cannot compete. And let me say this: If Al Sharpton, Mike Bloomberg, and Newt Gingrich can agree that we need to solve the education problem, then that's something all of America can agree we can solve. Those guys came into my office. [Laughter] Just sitting in the Oval Office—I kept on doing a double take. [Laughter] But that's a sign of progress and it is a sign of the urgency of the education problem. All of us can agree that we need to offer every child in this country—every child——
The President. Got an amen corner back there—[applause]—every child—every child in this country the best education the world has to offer from cradle through a career.
That's our responsibility as leaders. That's the responsibility of the United States of America. And we, all of us in Government, have to work to do our part by not only offering more resources but also demanding more reform. Because when it comes to education, we've got to get past this old paradigm, this outdated notion that somehow it's just money, or somehow it's just reform, but no money, and embrace what Dr. King called the "both-and" philosophy. We need more money, and we need more reform.
When it comes to higher education, we're making college and advanced training more affordable and strengthening community colleges that are the gateway to so many with an initiative that will prepare students not only to earn a degree but to find a job when they graduate, an initiative that will help us meet the goal I have set of leading the world in college degrees by 2020. We used to rank number one in college graduates. Now we are in the middle of the pack. And since we are seeing more and more African American and Latino youth in our population, if we are leaving them behind, we cannot achieve our goal, and America will fall further behind. And that is not a future that I accept, and that is not a future that the NAACP is willing to accept.
We've got to say to our children, yes, if you're African American, the odds of growing up amid crime and gangs are higher. Yes, if you live in a poor neighborhood, you will face challenges that somebody in a wealthy suburb does not have to face. But that's not a reason to get bad grades, that's not a reason to cut class, that's not a reason to give up on your education and drop out of school. No one has written your destiny for you. Your destiny is in your hands, you cannot forget that. That's what we have to teach all of our children. No excuses—no excuses. You get that education, all those hardships will just make you stronger, better able to compete. Yes we can.
But I had some brakes. That mother of mine, she gave me love; she pushed me; she cared about my education; she took no lip; she taught me right from wrong. Because of her, I had a chance to make the most of my abilities. I had the chance to make the most of my opportunities. I had the chance to make the most of life.
The same story holds true for Michelle. The same story holds true for so many of you. And I want all the other Barack Obamas out there, all the other Michelle Obamas out there to have the same chance, the chance that my mother gave me, that my education gave me, that the United States of America has given me. That's how our Union will be perfected and our economy rebuilt. That is how America will move forward in the next 100 years.
So changing reimbursement rates will help. The other thing that will really help both nurses and doctors, helping pay for medical education for those who are willing to go into primary care. And that's something that we already started to do under the Recovery Act, and we want to do more of that under health care reform.
I know that feeling. When I was young, my family lived overseas. I lived in Indonesia for a few years. And my mother, she didn't have the money to send me where all the American kids went to school, but she thought it was important for me to keep up with an American education. So she decided to teach me extra lessons herself, Monday through Friday. But because she had to go to work, the only time she could do it was at 4:30 in the morning. Now, as you might imagine, I wasn't too happy about getting up that early. And a lot of times, I'd fall asleep right there at the kitchen table. But whenever I'd complain, my mother would just give me one of those looks, and she'd say, "This is no picnic for me either, buster." [Laughter]
So I know that some of you are still adjusting to being back at school. But I'm here today because I have something important to discuss with you. I'm here because I want to talk with you about your education and what's expected of all of you in this new school year.
Now, I've given a lot of speeches about education. And I've talked about responsibility a lot. I've talked about teachers' responsibility for inspiring students and pushing you to learn. I've talked about your parents' responsibility for making sure you stay on track and you get your homework done and don't spend every waking hour in front of the TV or with the Xbox. I've talked a lot about your Government's responsibility for setting high standards and supporting teachers and principals and turning around schools that aren't working, where students aren't getting the opportunities that they deserve.
But at the end of the day, we can have the most dedicated teachers, the most supportive parents, the best schools in the world, and none of it will make a difference, none of it will matter, unless all of you fulfill your responsibilities, unless you show up to those schools, unless you pay attention to those teachers, unless you listen to your parents and grandparents and other adults and put in the hard work it takes to succeed. And that's what I want to focus on today: the responsibility each of you has for your education.
I want to start with the responsibility you have to yourself. Every single one of you has something that you're good at. Every single one of you has something to offer. And you have a responsibility to yourself to discover what that is. That's the opportunity an education can provide.
And no matter what you want to do with your life, I guarantee that you'll need an education to do it. You want to be a doctor or a teacher or a police officer? You want to be a nurse or an architect, a lawyer or a member of our military? You're going to need a good education for every single one of those careers. You cannot drop out of school and just drop into a good job. You've got to train for it and work for it and learn for it.
And this isn't just important for your own life and your own future. What you make of your education will decide nothing less than the future of this country. The future of America depends on you. What you're learning in school today will determine whether we as a nation can meet our greatest challenges in the future.
And Jazmin, Andoni, and Shantell aren't any different from any of you. They face challenges in their lives just like you do. In some cases, they've got it a lot worse off than many of you. But they refused to give up. They chose to take responsibility for their lives, for their education, and set goals for themselves. And I expect all of you to do the same.
And that's why today I'm calling on each of you to set your own goals for your education and do everything you can to meet them. Your goal can be something as simple as doing all your homework, paying attention in class, or spending some time each day reading a book. Maybe you'll decide to get involved in an extracurricular activity or volunteer in your community. Maybe you'll decide to stand up for kids who are being teased or bullied because of who they are or how they look, because you believe, like I do, that all young people deserve a safe environment to study and learn. Maybe you'll decide to take better care of yourself so you can be more ready to learn. And along those lines, by the way, I hope all of you are washing your hands a lot and that you stay home from school when you don't feel well so we can keep people from getting the flu this fall and winter. But whatever you resolve to do, I want you to commit to it. I want you to really work at it.
Now, your families, your teachers, and I are doing everything we can to make sure you have the education you need to answer these questions. I'm working hard to fix up your classrooms and get you the books and the equipment and the computers you need to learn. But you've got to do your part too. So I expect all of you to get serious this year. I expect you to put your best effort into everything you do. I expect great things from each of you. So don't let us down. Don't let your family down or your country down. Most of all, don't let yourself down. Make us all proud.
On the education front, I just visited Martin Luther King Charter School, the first school to reopen in the Ninth Ward and an inspiration for this city. We've also worked to be a better partner and free up funding that has allowed places like this university right here, the University of New Orleans and the Southern University of New Orleans to rebuild. We're looking for ways to be more flexible, so New Orleans can build the school system it deserves. And because a lot of your public schools opened themselves up to new ideas and innovative reforms, we're actually seeing an improvement in overall achievement that is making the city a model for reform nationwide. That is good news, thanks to the hard work being done right here in New Orleans.
But the Recovery Act is just the start. If we want a recovery the lasts, if we want an economy that really grows again, we've got to rebuild stronger than before, just like you're doing here in New Orleans. We need to come together and meet the challenges that were with us before this recession hit: schools that weren't closing before the recession. That means building a clean energy economy that can lead to millions of new jobs and new industries. That means building an education system that equips every citizen with the skills and training they need to compete with any worker in the world. That means building a health care system that finally offers security to those who have insurance and affordable options to those who don't.
So I guess my point is this: I make no excuses for the fact that Federal Government did not work effectively with State and local governments immediately in the aftermath of the storm to make sure that everybody got the help they needed right away. And we are still working through the backlog of problems that exist. But you know, I will say that I think not only Democrat Mary Landrieu, but also, I think, Republican Governor Jindal will tell you that our team is outstanding, they are working really hard all the time to try to get these things resolved as quickly as possible. And my expectation is, is that by the time that my term is over, you guys are going to look back and you're going to say, this was a responsive administration on health care, on housing, on education, that actually made sure that the money flowed and that things got done the way they were supposed to get done.
But the future of Indian Country rests on something more: the education we provide our children. We know that Native Americans face some of the lowest matriculation rates and highest high school and college dropout rates. And that's why the Recovery Act also included $170 million for Indian education and $277 million for Indian school construction. And that's why my budget provided $50 million in advanced funding for tribal colleges that are often economic lifelines for a community. Students who study at a tribal college are eight times less likely to drop out of higher education, they continue on to a 4-year institution at a higher rate than students in community colleges, and nearly 80 percent end up in careers that help their tribal nation.
I'd like you to help us by providing opportunities to enhance education, cultural language teachings within our community. Many Indians and Alaska Natives live in third world countries. There is a great poverty of unsustainable economies in Indian Country. There is a lack of capital.
Our people had organized a government in 1963. Topics that they discussed was land, health, education, employment, unemployment. And today we come here before you with those same concerns, 46 years later. So these are—in our ceremonies at home, in our hearts, we talk—we think about that today would be a day different from day when our elders, when our ancestors, made treaties with the United States. They were broken; they were not honored, but today would be different.
And the second issue is our children. Our children are sacred. We want the best for them. And we ask that you help us to ensure a better education, a better life, well being for our children, because they're going to be the future leaders.
In the 2 years since this recession began, too many members of our American family have felt the gut punch of a pink slip. Eight million Americans have lost their jobs. Every one of us knows somebody who has been swept up by this storm: neighbors who've lost their homes or their health care, friends who've used up their savings or put off their retirement, relatives who've downscaled their dreams or dropped them entirely, young people who aren't sure whether they can afford their college educations. I've heard these stories from every corner of America, and I see them in the letters that I read every single night.
That's why I've taken on our broken health insurance system, so that families and businesses won't have to cope with double-digit premium increases year after year. That's why my Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, is taking on our education system, so that our kids can compete in the 21st-century economy. And that's why we are working to upgrade America's most underappreciated asset, community colleges just like this one. That's why we're doing everything we can to spur new industries, like clean energy, to create good, new jobs that won't be sent offshore. And that's why, when the current emergency passes, I'm committed to bringing down the deficits that loom as a threat to our future economic growth.
Last point I want to make, and that has to do with education. You know, I was in Asia for a week, and we were mostly talking about trade and how we can increase U.S. exports. I'm tired of just them sending goods into the United States. I want to start sending goods from the United States out there.
But I mentioned this yesterday at the jobs summit, and I want to mention it again today. I was having lunch with the President of South Korea, and that country has gone from dirt poverty and now is just booming. I mean, they are doing really well. And I asked him, you know, "What's your biggest challenge in terms of education?" He said, "You know, my biggest challenge is the parents are just too demanding." [Laughter] He said, "They're in my office—I've had to import foreign teachers, pay for foreign teachers to come teach English to Korean kids." Because all the parents there think that their kids should be learning English when they're in first grade.
But more importantly, one of my commitments as President was, we are going to whip the VA into shape because when our men and women are serving on behalf of all of us, we've got a solemn obligation to look after them when they come home. And this 9/11—post-9/11 GI bill, I think, is a great example of it. My grandfather fought in World War II, and then he got his college education on the GI bill. It wasn't just good for him. Because of that whole greatest generation going to college, that built our middle class. And all the things that we've been talking about in terms of science and technology and innovation and clean energy, all that depends on what happens in a place like Lehigh, making sure that people are being trained and constantly upgrading their skills for the future.
Now, 2 years ago, I addressed your gathering, and I outlined a new strategy for urban America that changed the way Washington does business with our cities and our metropolitan areas. And since taking office, my administration has taken a hard look at that relationship, from matters of infrastructure to transportation, education to energy, housing to sustainable development. My staff has traveled around the country to see the fresh ideas and successful solutions that you've devised. And we've learned a great deal about what we can do, and shouldn't do, to help rebuild and revitalize our cities and metropolitan areas for the future.
And obviously, I want to thank the Powells, and I will start with the more important Powell, Alma. [Laughter] I want to say a word about the remarkable woman who introduced me, a champion of children, a dedicated public servant, and the recipient of numerous awards. And Alma has poured herself into America's Promise Alliance, helping make it the largest partnership of its kind to improve education and help children in this country.
And perhaps that's not surprising, because being an educator seems to run in the family, as I understand. Even though one of her mother's parents was born into slavery and the other just after abolition, both went to college, became teachers, four of their children followed them into the education profession. So her family has educated and enriched generations of Americans, and our Nation is better off for it. And so we are very grateful to you for your extraordinary leadership. Thank you.
Now, it's fitting that we're talking about education here at the Chamber of Commerce. After all, for America to compete and to win in the 21st century, we know that we will need a highly educated workforce that is second to none. And we know that the success of every American will be tied more closely than ever before to the level of education that they achieve. The jobs will go to the people with the knowledge and the skills to do them. It's that simple. In this kind of knowledge economy, giving up on your education and dropping out of school means not only giving up on your future, but it's also giving up on your family's future and giving up on your country's future.
And that's what happened in Rhode Island last week at a chronically troubled school, when just 7 percent of 11th graders passed State math tests--7 percent. When a school board wasn't able to deliver change by other means, they voted to lay off the faculty and the staff. As my Education Secretary, Arne Duncan, says, our kids get only one chance at an education, and we need to get it right.
But as I've said before, education is not and cannot be the task of government alone. It's going to take nonprofits and businesses doing their part through alliances like America's Promise. It will take parents getting involved in their children's education, consistently, going to parent-teachers conferences, helping their children with their homework. I have to point out I just went to my daughter's parent-teachers conference last week. She's doing very well, by the way. [Laughter] It will take students as well, showing up to school on time and paying attention to classes and staying out of trouble. They're not let off the hook. Education isn't a passive activity, it's an active one.
I'm absolutely confident that because of the work of Colin and Alma Powell, because of the work that Grad Nation campaign is going to be doing and America's Promise Alliance is going to be doing, because of the work that we're doing across this Nation to give our children the best education the world has to offer, from cradle to classroom, from college through career, that we are chiseling away at the obstacles that lie in our path, that block our children's potential. We want to unlock that potential, carve it out so that our economy succeeds, so that this country succeeds, and so that our children and grandchildren succeed.
Traditionally, Central America has been seen as a migratory problem for the United States. But Central America, and in particularly El Salvador, needs to generate the opportunities of work in order to be able to keep people back in El Salvador. And as they have a better job generation and people have better health and education, people will be able to remain in the countries and have a better life.
One year ago this week, we kicked off a national conversation on fatherhood and personal responsibility, and members of our administration fanned out all across the country to hear from fathers and families about the challenges that they face. Secretary Arne Duncan, our Secretary of Education, held a discussion in New Hampshire about the link between fatherhood and educational achievement. Gary Locke talked to fathers in California about balancing the needs of their families with the demands of their jobs. Secretary Shinseki of Veterans Affairs held a town hall for military and veteran dads in North Carolina. And Attorney General Holder traveled to Georgia for a forum about fathers in our criminal justice system.
So we can talk all we want here in Washington about issues like education and health care and crime. We can build good schools. We can put money into creating good jobs. We can do everything we can to keep our streets safe, but government can't keep our kids from looking for trouble on those streets. Government can't force a kid to pick up a book or make sure that the homework gets done. Government can't be there day in, day out to provide discipline and guidance and the love that it takes to raise a child. That's our job as fathers, as mothers, as guardians for our children.
We launched the most aggressive education reforms in decades so that our children can gain the knowledge and skills they need to compete in a 21st-century global economy.
Our laws should respect families following the rules, instead of splitting them apart. We need to provide farms a legal way to hire the workers they rely on and a path for those workers to earn legal status. And we should stop punishing innocent young people for the actions of their parents by denying them the chance to stay here and earn an education and contribute their talents to build the country where they've grown up. The "DREAM Act" would do this, and that's why I supported this bill as a State legislator and as a U.S. Senator and why I continue to support it as President.
Now, since we're on the topic of speaking honestly with one another, I want to devote the balance of my time, the balance of my remarks to an issue that I believe will largely determine not only African American success but the success of our Nation in the 21st century, and that is whether we are offering our children the very best education possible.
I know some argue that as we emerge from a recession, my administration should focus solely on economic issues. They said that during health care, as if health care had nothing to do with economics, said it during financial reform, as if financial reform had nothing to do with economics, and now they're saying it as we work on education issues. But education is an economic issue, if not the economic issue of our time.
It's an economic issue when the unemployment rate for folks who've never gone to college is almost double what it is for those who have gone to college. It's an economic issue when 8 in 10 new jobs will require workforce training or a higher education by the end of this decade. It's an economic issue when countries that outeducate us today are going to outcompete us tomorrow.
Now, for years, we've recognized that education is a prerequisite for prosperity. And yet we've tolerated a status quo where America lags behind other nations. Just last week, we learned that in a single generation, America went from number 1 to 12th in college completion rates for young adults--used to be number 1, now we're number 12.
And that's why--[applause]--that is why, from day one of this administration, we've made excellence in American education, excellence for all our students, a top priority. And no one has shown more leadership on this issue than my Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, who is here today.
Now, because a higher education has never been more important or more expensive, it's absolutely essential that we put a college degree within reach for anyone who wants it. And that's why we're making higher education more affordable, so we can meet the goals I've set of producing a higher share of college graduates than any other nation by 2020. I want us to be back at number 1 instead of number 12.
But here's the thing: Even if we do all this good stuff for higher education, too many of our children see college as nothing but a distant dream because their education went off the rails long before they turned 18. These are young people who've been relegated to failing schools in struggling communities, where there are too many obstacles, too few role models, communities that I represented as a State senator, communities that I fought to lift up as a community organizer.
I remember going to a school back in my organizing days and seeing children, young children, maybe 5 or 6, eyes were brimming with hope, had such big dreams for the future. You'd ask them, what do you want to be when you grow up? They'd want to be a doctor; they'd want to be a lawyer. And then I remember the principal telling me that soon, all that would change. The hope would start fading from their eyes as they started to realize that maybe their dreams wouldn't come to pass, not because they weren't smart enough, not because they weren't talented enough, but because through a turn of fate, they happened to be born in the wrong neighborhood. They became victim of low expectations, a community that was not supporting educational excellence.
That's why I want to challenge our States to offer better early learning options to make sure our children aren't wasting their most formative years so that they can enter into kindergarten already ready to learn, knowing their colors, knowing their numbers, knowing their shapes, knowing how to sit still. [Laughter] Right? That's no joke. You got to learn that, especially when you're a boy. [Laughter] That's why we placed such heavy emphasis on the education our children are getting from kindergarten through 12th grade.
And so far, the results have been promising and they have been powerful. In an effort to compete for this extra money, 32 States reformed their education laws before we even spent a dime. The competition leveraged change at the State level. And because the standards we set were high, only a couple of States actually won the grant in the first round, which meant that the States that didn't get the money, they've now strengthened their applications, made additional reforms. Now 36 have applied in the second round, and 18 States plus the District of Columbia are in the running to get a second grant.
So understand what's happened. In each successive round, we've leveraged change across the country. And even students in those districts that haven't gotten a grant, they've still benefited from the reforms that were initiated. And this process has sown the seeds of achievement. It's forced teachers and principals and officials and parents to forge agreements on tough and often uncomfortable issues, to raise their sights and embrace education.
I also want to directly speak to the issue of teachers. We may have some teachers here in the house. [Applause] I know Urban League has got some teachers. Nothing is more important than teachers. My sister is a teacher. I'm here because of great teachers. The whole premise of Race to the Top is that teachers are the single most important factor in a child's education from the moment they step into the classroom. And I know firsthand that the vast majority of teachers are working tirelessly, are passionate about their students, are often digging into their own pockets for basic supplies, are going above and beyond the call of duty.
Arne makes the point very simply: Our children get only one chance at an education, so we need to get it right.
So Race to the Top isn't simply the name of an initiative. It sums up what's happening in our schools. It's the single most ambitious, meaningful education reform effort we've attempted in this country in generations.
And I know there are a number of other steps we need to take to lift up our education system--like saving teachers' jobs across this country from layoffs--and I'll continue fighting to take those steps and save those jobs. But I'll also continue to fight for Race to the Top with everything I've got, including using a veto to prevent some folks from watering it down.
Now, let me wrap up by saying this. I know there are some who say that Race to the Top won't work. There are cynics and naysayers who argue that the problems in our education system are too entrenched, that think that we'll just fall back into the same old arguments and divides that have held us back for so long. And it is true, as I've said since I ran for President, and that everybody here knows firsthand, change is hard. I don't know if you've noticed. That's why I've got all this gray hair. [Laughter]
Fixing what was broken in our health care system is not easy. Fixing what was broken on Wall Street is not easy. Fixing what's broken in our education system is not easy. We won't see results overnight. It may take a decade for these changes to pay off. But that's not a reason not to make them. It's a reason to start making them right now, to feel a sense of urgency, the fierce urgency of now.
We also know that as significant as these reforms are, there's going to be one more ingredient to really make a difference: Parents are going to have to get more involved in their children's education. Now, in the past, even that statement has sparked controversy. Folks say, well, why are you talking about parents? [Laughter] Parents need help too. I know that. Parents need jobs. They need housing. They need, in some cases, social services. They may have substance abuse problems. We're working on all those fronts.
Then some people say, well, why are you always talking about parental responsibility in front of Black folks? [Laughter] And I say, I talk about parental responsibility wherever I talk about education. Michelle and I happen to be Black parents, so--[laughter]--I may add a little umph to it when I'm talking to Black parents. [Laughter]
But to paraphrase Dr. King, education isn't an either-or proposition, it's a both-and proposition. It will take both more focus from our parents and better schooling. It will take both more money and more reform. It will take both a collective commitment and a personal commitment.
It's not just parents. It's the children too. Our kids need to understand nobody is going to hand them a future. An education is not something you just tip your head and they pour it in your ear. [Laughter] You've got to want it. You've got to reach out and claim that future for yourself. And you can't make excuses.
I got a letter recently postmarked Covington, Kentucky. It was from Na'Dreya Lattimore, 10 years old, about the same age as Sasha. And she told me about how her school had closed, so she had enrolled in another. Then she had bumped up against other barriers to what she felt was her potential. So Na'Dreya was explaining to me how we need to improve our education system. She closed by saying this: "One more thing," she said--[laughter]--this is a long letter--[laughter]--"You need to look at us differently. We are not Black, we're not White, biracial, Hispanic, Asian, or any other nationality." No, she wrote, "We are the future."
We've also included a permanent reauthorization of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act in the health care reform legislation we passed this spring. We're strengthening tribal education. We're working to spur economic development throughout Indian Country. And in consultation with Indian tribes, we're now formally reviewing the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. And after 14 long years, we've finally settled the Cobell case and we're working with Congress to get the settlement approved as quickly as possible.
NOTE: The President spoke at 4:58 p.m. in the East Room at the White House. In his remarks, he referred to Lisa M. Iyotte, education specialist, Sicangu Coalition Against Sexual &amp; Domestic Violence; Marcus D. Levings, chairman, Three Affiliated Tribes; Theresa B. Two Bulls, president, Oglala Sioux Tribe; Diane Enos, president, Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community; Chadwick "Corntassel" Smith, principal chief, Cherokee Nation; Jonathan Windy Boy, vice chairman, Chippewa Cree Tribal Council; Senior Policy Adviser for Native American Affairs Kimberly K. Teehee; and Jodi Archambault Gillette, Associate Director of the White House Office of Public Engagement and Deputy Associate Director of the Office of Intergovernmental Affairs. H.R. 725, approved July 29, was assigned Public Law No. 111-211.
In education, we've made strides as well. As you know, schools in New Orleans were falling behind long before Katrina. But in the years since the storm, a lot of public schools opened themselves up to innovation and to reform. And as a result, we're actually seeing rising achievement, and New Orleans is becoming a model of innovation for the Nation. This is yet another sign that you're not just rebuilding, you're rebuilding stronger than before. Just this Friday, my administration announced a final agreement on $1.8 billion for Orleans Parish schools. This is money that had been locked up for years, but now it's freed up, so folks here can determine best how to restore the school system.
So that's how we're helping this city and this State and this region to recover from the worst natural disaster in our Nation's history. We're cutting through the redtape that has impeded rebuilding efforts for years. We're making government work better and smarter in coordination with one of the most expansive nonprofit efforts in American history. We're helping State and local leaders to address serious problems that had been neglected for decades, problems that existed before the storm came and have continued after the waters receded, from the levee system to the justice system, from the health care system to the education system.
And there are a whole host of individual issues--education and energy and what we do in terms of our foreign policy--a whole bunch of discrete issues that concerned me. What concerned me most, I think, was the nature of our economy and how the American Dream seemed as if it was slipping away for too many people.
The other thing that was happening was that we were becoming less competitive internationally, so manufacturing jobs were moving overseas. You saw countries like China and India and Brazil investing heavily in their education systems and in infrastructure. And where we used to be ranked number one, for example, in the proportion of college graduates, we now rank number 12; where we used to have--had the best public school system in the world, now our kids rank 21st in science and 25th in math. And so slowly, all the things that had made us the most productive country on Earth were starting to slip away, and we were losing that competitive position.
That's why we've put so much emphasis on education reform. And this is one area where I think that we've actually gotten some compliments from Republicans, because we're--we are not taking an ideological approach. We're saying: How do we create more accountability in the system? How do we encourage better teachers in the classroom? How do we break through some of the bureaucracy to make sure our kids are learning what they need to learn?
And I just want to use as an example the proposal that they put forward with respect to tax policy. They want to borrow $700 billion to provide tax cuts for the top 2 percent of Americans, people making more than $250,000 a year. It would mean an average of a $100,000 check to millionaires and billionaires. That's $700 billion we don't have, so we'd either have to borrow it, which would add to our deficit, or we'd have to cut, just to give you an example, about 20 percent of the amount of money that we spend on education. We'd have to cut investments we've made in clean energy. We'd have to cut investments we've made in Head Start. We'd have to cut improvements in terms of student loans for kids going to college that would affect about 8 million kids.
And so their future will be fine. But in the short term, what I'd say to them is that, first of all, we're doing everything we can to make sure that they can get the best education possible.
One of the things that we did this year that didn't get a lot of attention was we were able to change the student loan program out of the Federal Government to save about $60 billion that's going to go directly to students in the form of higher grants, reduced loan burdens--debt burdens when they get out of college. It's going to make a difference to them. So we're going to do everything we can to make sure they can succeed educationally.
I guess what my commentary comes down to is, as the Government--it gets more and more involved in business and gets more involved in taxes to pay for an awful lot of programs, what you're finding is, you're strangling those job-creation vehicles that are available; you're sort of strangling the engine that does create the jobs. We have jobs that we offer, I mean, regularly. There's always an opportunity for somebody that wants to work hard. I don't care what the background is. I don't care what the health level, what the education is, or where they came from.
The second most powerful thing I can do to reduce the poverty rate is improve our education system, because the single biggest indicator of poverty is whether or not you graduated from high school and you're able to get some sort of postsecondary education. And right now too many of our schools are failing.
So this week we spent a lot of time talking about the education reforms we've already initiated. As I said, we set up something called Race to the Top. And it was a simple idea: The Federal Government sends education dollars to schools all across the country to help them, particularly poorer schools. But what we said is, we're going to take a portion of that money--$4 billion--and we're going to say to the States, you're going to have a competition for this money. You're not automatically going to get it because of some formula. You've got to show us that you are initiating reforms that are going to recruit better teachers and train them more effectively; that are going to have greater accountability measures so you're able to track how students are doing during the course of the school year and make adjustments so that they're not just being passed along from grade to grade even though they can't read and--or do arithmetic at their grade level. We're going to encourage more charter schools and more experiments in learning across the country.
All these reform efforts that we triggered through this competition have meant that 32 States actually changed their laws. It's probably the biggest set of reforms that we've seen nationwide on public education in a generation.
So we're putting a lot of resources and effort into making sure that community colleges are constantly improving, and they're adapting their curriculum to the jobs of the future. So education and growing the economy generally, those are the most important things I can do for poverty.
Those are all things that are important, and we're going to keep on doing them. But if we can grow this economy and improve our education system, that's going to be the most important thing we can do.
A lot of folks at the age of 50, they don't need 2 years of education, but they may need 6 months where they're able to retool and get some help paying the bills and making the mortgage while they are retooling. And those are the kinds of programs that I think we need to set up.
Now, let me say up front a few words about Martin. Here is a man who made tough choices in tough times to move Maryland forward. His rock-solid support for public education has made Maryland schools the best in America 2 years in a row, the best in America--not the best on the East Coast, not the best in the Mid-Atlantic States, the best in America.
The President. That's what they said. And we all know what that agenda was. Basically, you've been there, done that. [Laughter] Basically, what they're saying is we're going to cut taxes, mostly for millionaires and billionaires. Then we're going to cut regulations for special interests. We're going to cut back on investments in education and clean energy, in research and technology. And basically, the idea is if we just put blind faith in the marketplace and if we let corporations play by their own rules, and we leave everybody else to fend for themselves, then America is going to somehow grow and prosper. What did this young lady say? Been there, done that.
But when you look at the "Pledge to America," it turns out they do have an idea about how to pay for a small portion of it. They want to cut education by 20 percent.
The President. Now, I want to just focus on this for a minute, because here in Maryland, you understand how important education is to our economy, how important it is to our future. Martin O'Malley knows that too. His opponent raised college tuition in this State by 40 percent when he was in charge. This is at a time when the economy was doing better. Now, even in the toughest of times, over the last 2 years, Martin O'Malley froze in-State tuition, so he kept the cost of this school and other schools affordable for Maryland's families. And thanks to his unprecedented investment in Maryland's education, as I said before, you've been ranked the best when it comes to public schools the last 2 years in a row. That's what Martin O'Malley does. He walks the walk, doesn't just talk the talk.
But we can't maintain this progress if our opponents have their way. At a time when the education of our country's citizens is one of the biggest predictors of economic success, they think it's more important to give another tax break to folks who don't need it and weren't even asking for them than to invest in our young people.
Let me ask you--I want to ask my Republican friends a question here: Do you think China is cutting back on education right now?
The President. Do you think South Korea is making it harder for its citizens to get a college education?
As long as I am President, and as long as Martin O'Malley is your Governor, we will not allow politicians in Washington or Annapolis sacrifice your education for tax cuts we can't afford. That is the choice in this election.
The President. Instead of cutting education, cutting student aid, we want to make permanent our new college tax credit. This is a credit worth $10,000 in tuition relief for every young person going to 4 years of college. That means you, Bowie State.
So on a whole range of issues, my hope was, is that we could come together, Democrats and Republicans, to find practical, commonsense solutions to health care, to education, to energy issues, because although I'm a proud Democrat, I'm a prouder American. And I think all of us believe, regardless of our party affiliations, that this is a critical time, where we've got to solve big problems.
So there are a lot of things we've done well, but here's the broader point. I do think that there are a lot of good Republican ideas out there. In fact, there were a number of them that were incorporated in this health care bill. And my hope is, is that as we look forward, let's say on education or on energy, some of the things that we haven't yet finished, that we're going to have a greater spirit of cooperation after this next election.
My question is, what is your administration planning to do to improve comprehensive primary education and address college affordability?
There are two steps in terms of education. And keep in mind that what has made America the wealthiest, most successful country on Earth historically has been our commitment to education. We started the public school system very early in the century, and as a consequence we had more skilled workers than any nation on Earth, which meant that we were more productive than any nation on Earth. We then made a commitment, particularly after World War II with the GI bill, to massively expand our commitment to college education, and that meant we had more engineers and we had more scientists and that meant we had better technology, which meant that we were more productive and we could succeed in the global marketplace.
And what's happened in a generation is that our lead has slipped. We're now--we rank 21st when it comes to math education. We rank 25th when it comes to science. We used to be number one in the proportion of college graduates. We now rank ninth. And at an age where knowledge, skills, are the determinant of how successful we're going to be, unless we reverse that we're going to keep slipping behind economically to a lot of other countries. I mean, China is not playing for second place. Germany, South Korea--these are all countries that are investing massively in education. We've got to do the same thing.
And through something called Race to the Top, we've been inspiring reforms all across the country, using relatively little amounts of money, but we give them an incentive. We say, if you want some additional money for your school, we'll give it to you. But you've got to compete, show us that you're going to reform your education system so that our children are performing better. Now, that's at the K-12 level.
We're also emphasizing, by the way, math and science education, especially for women, young girls, and for minorities who oftentimes underperform in those fields. And we want to generate more math and science teachers, and we're getting the private sector to help us by paying for the training and the scholarships for more math and science teachers.
Ms. Cook. Hi, I'm fabulous. Thank you. I wanted to give you an idea, first of all, of some of our trending topics we've been seeing on Twitter. Pretty much number one for the last couple of days has been jobs, education in the second category there. LGBT issues have been kind of floating between third and fourth position, obviously a very, very important issue.
And so what we've said is for those young people, who didn't break any laws, they didn't have a choice when they came here, give them a chance by getting an education or serving in our military, having a series of standards that they have to meet in terms of showing good character. And if they do that, then give them a pathway for finally getting their paperwork straight and being full-fledged American citizens.
That's something I think we've got to avoid. We've got to be able to have a conversation and recognize we're all Americans; we all want the best for this country. We may have some disagreements in terms of how to get there, but all of us want to make sure that our economy is strong, that jobs are growing. All of us want to make sure that people aren't bankrupt when they get sick. All of us want to make sure that young people can afford an education.
That's why we've got to prioritize education going forward. Thank you.
But keep in mind, things were tough even before the financial crisis hit. Between 2001 and 2009, average middle class families in America lost 5 percent of income, when the Republicans were in charge. We had the slowest job growth since World War II when the Republicans were in charge. You saw your health care costs go up. You saw the cost of a college education go up. Too many jobs being shipped overseas, too many folks working two, three jobs and still barely making ends meet. And all this culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
We believe in a country that rewards hard work and responsibility. We believe in an America that invests in its future and its people, in the education of our children, in the skills of our workers. We believe in an America where we look after one another, where I am my brother's keeper, I am my sister's keeper. That's the America we believe in. That's the choice in this election.
If the other side gets the keys, they say they want to give a $700 billion tax cut to the top 2 percent, millionaires and billionaires. They don't have the money. The only way to pay for it is to borrow some money from China and then to cut education spending by 20 percent.
Now, think about this. Here we are in the 21st century where everybody knows that the country that educates their people the best is going to succeed the most. Do you think China is cutting education by 20 percent?
The President. Do you think South Korea or Germany or India are cutting education by 20 percent?
Yesterday I had the chance to meet with several tribal leaders at the White House, continuing a conversation that began long before I was President. And while I'm glad to have the opportunity to speak with you this morning, I'm also very eager to see the results of today's meeting. I want to hear more from you about how we can strengthen the relationship between our governments, whether in education or health care or in fighting crime or in creating jobs.
Of course, there are few steps we can take that will make more of a difference for the future of your communities than improving education on tribal lands. We've got to improve the education we provide to our children. That's the cornerstone on which all of our progress will be built. We know that Native Americans are far more likely to drop out of high school and far less likely to go to college. That not only damages the prospects for tribal economies, it's a heartbreaking waste of human potential. We cannot afford to squander the promise of our young people. Your communities can't afford it, and our country can't afford it. And we are going to start doing something about it.
We're rebuilding schools on tribal lands, while helping to ensure that tribes play a bigger role in determining what their children learn. We're working to empower parents with more and better options for schools for their kids, as well as with support programs that actually work with Indian parents to give them a real voice in improving education in your communities.
Now, all these efforts--improving health care, education, the economy--ultimately, these efforts will not succeed unless all of our communities are safe places to grow up and attend school and open businesses, and where people are not living under the constant threat of violence and crime. And that threat remains real, as crime rates in Indian Country are anywhere from twice to 20 times the national average. That's a sobering statistic--represents a cloud over the future of your communities.
We both agree to strengthen exchanges and cooperation in economy and trade, energy and the environment, science and technology, infrastructure construction, culture and education, counterterrorism, nonproliferation, law enforcement, and other areas so as to achieve mutual benefit.
During this visit, President Obama and I reached an agreement that both sides will take positive steps to further increase the people-to-people exchanges. On the one hand, we will encourage the young people in our two countries to go to each other's countries to pursue further education and to learn more about each other. And at the same time, we have also decided to put in place a dialogue and exchange mechanisms between different Chinese and American Provinces and States. Besides, we are also going to further expand cultural exchanges and develop tourism. We're going to use a variety of means to further increase people-to-people exchanges.
Now, that gives us some responsibilities. We've got to save more in this country. We've got to cut back on these huge levels of debt both in the private sector, but also in the public sector. It also means that there are structural reforms that we have to undergo to make ourselves more competitive in the world economy. So making sure that we have the best education system in the world, that we're producing more engineers than lawyers; making sure that we have a handle on our fiscal problems; making sure that we've got a world-class infrastructure: Those are all important parts of us being competitive and being able to export.
So Government has to do what American families do every day: live within our means. But even as we do so, we can't sacrifice our future. I'll just give you guys an analogy. If you're trying to cut back in your family, you might decide, we're not going to go out to dinner so often; maybe we'll skip the vacation; we're not going to remodel the kitchen. But you wouldn't stop saving for your child's college education. You wouldn't stop saving for your own retirement. If your boiler was broken or your roof had a leak, you'd still go ahead and make those investments.
Well, the same is true with our country. We've got to cut out the equivalents of eating out and vacations. I know there may be some restaurant owners here--go eat at their restaurants--[Laughter]--but I'm just making a general point. Even as we cut out the things we can afford to do without, we got a responsibility to invest in those areas that will have the biggest impact on our future, and those things are innovation, education, and infrastructure.
And you've created new online learning opportunities for K-12 students as far as 30 miles away, some of whom can't always make it to school in a place that averages 200 inches of snow a year. [Laughter] Now, some of these students don't appreciate the end of school [snow]* days. I know Malia and Sasha get really excited about school [snow]* days. Of course, in Washington, things shut down when there's an inch of snow. [Laughter] But this technology is giving them more opportunity. It's good for their education, it's good for our economy. In fact, I just came from a demonstration of online learning in action. We were with Professor Lubig, and he had plugged in Negaunee High School and Powell Township School in Big Bay. So I felt like the guy in Star Trek. I was being beamed around--[Laughter]--across the Upper Peninsula here. But it was remarkable to see the possibilities for these young people who are able to, let's say, do a chemistry experiment, and they can compare the results with kids in Boston.
So to make this happen, we're going to invest in research and development of emerging technologies and applications. We're going to accelerate breakthroughs in health and education and transportation, and deploy a new nationwide, interoperable wireless network for first-responders, making sure they've got the funding and the frequencies that they were promised and that they need to keep us safe. It's important. By selling private companies the rights to these airwaves, we won't just encourage private investment and expand wireless access, we're actually going to bring in revenues that lower our deficits.
I reiterated that the United States accepts our shared responsibility for the drug violence. So to combat the southbound flow of guns and money, we are screening all southbound rail cargo, seizing many more guns bound for Mexico, and we are putting more gunrunners behind bars. And as part of our new drug control strategy, we are focused on reducing the demand for drugs through education, prevention, and treatment.
President Obama. All right. Let me deal with football first. [Laughter] You've got owners, most of whom are worth close to a billion dollars. You got players who are making millions of dollars. My working assumption at a time when people are having to cut back, compromise, and worry about making the mortgage and paying for their kids' college education is, is that the two parties should be able to work it out without the President of the United States intervening.
We have had with President Obama a very open, frank, and fruitful conversation, and we have been able to subscribe many agreements of different nature, but they do have something in common. They all contribute to a better life and better quality of life for our peoples, like trade promotion and to accelerate and perfect the free trade agreement we have with the United States; cooperation in the field of education and English teaching as--in order to make of Chile a bilingual country; collaboration in the developments and efficient use of energies, and cleaner energies in particular, renewable energies, where Chile has enormous potential; and also collaboration in research technologies and training of our engineers and technicians in nuclear energy.
The President and I discussed our shared commitment to expanding educational exchanges among our students, who can learn from each other and bring our countries even closer together. And in my speech today, I'll announce an ambitious new initiative to increase student exchanges between the United States and Latin America, including Chile.
On education, obviously, we have a long history of public education, and our universities, I think, are second to none. But we want to make sure that in this increasingly integrated world, American students aren't just looking inwards, we're also looking outwards. And so the idea of us setting up a broad-based exchange program with the Americas, I think, makes an enormous difference.
And that alliance should be comprehensive. It should reach out to the fields of democracy, freedom, rule of law, defense of human rights. And I think that we have to improve the democratic charter of OAS. It should also open up the doors to the free trade of goods and services, and faster than what we have done hitherto. And in addition to that, to include those subjects which are the true pillars of the 21st century: quality of education, science, technology, innovation, entrepreneurship. Therein lie the pillars for Latin America so as to leave poverty and antidevelopment behind.
Across the Americas, parents want their children to be able to run and play and know that they'll come home safely. Young people all desperately want an education. Fathers want the dignity that comes from work, and women want the same opportunities as their husbands. Entrepreneurs want the chance to start that new business. And people everywhere want to be treated with the respect to which every human being is entitled. These are the hopes--simple yet profound--that beat in the hearts of millions across the Americas.
I've said before, and I will repeat: As President, I've made it clear that the United States shares and accepts our share of responsibility for drug violence. After all, the demand for drugs, including in the United States, drives this crisis. And that's why we've developed a new drug control strategy that focused on reducing the demand for drugs through education and prevention and treatment. And I would point out that even during difficult fiscal times in the United States, we've proposed increasing our commitment to these efforts by some $10 billion this year alone.
Thanks to smart investments in education, rural development, and infrastructure, El Salvador has made gains in reducing poverty. And to build on this progress, El Salvador is one of the first four countries in the world in our Partnership for Growth, which is a key element of my administration's new approach to development.
And that's why emphasis on education and emphasizing social programs, giving young people other pathways has to be part of this overall program.
And something that is very important--and I'm pleased to hear that President Obama agrees with us--that the efforts that we make in repression and persecution of criminals is not going to do anything unless we take away from the criminals the fertile soil that they have found in this region. And this fertile soil is thanks to the fact that we have a lot of youngsters that are living in a situation of poverty and social exclusion, exclusion from the benefits and the services that the state should give them. And this is why I insisted with President Obama that we cannot continue offering our youngsters in El Salvador and the region, or go to the United States to find employment and entertaining and education opportunities that they don't find here, or to fall in the hands of the criminal gangs, especially the gangs.
I mean, one CEO had this to say about reform: "American ingenuity is a product of the openness and diversity of this society. Immigrants have made America great as the world leader in business, in science, higher education, and innovation." You know who that leader was? Rupert Murdoch, who owns FOX News and is an immigrant himself. I don't know if you're familiar with Rupert Murdoch's views, but let's just say he doesn't have an Obama sticker on his car. [Laughter] But he agrees with me on this.
And we should stop punishing innocent young people for the actions of their parents. We should stop denying them the chance to earn an education or serve in the military. And that's why we need to pass the "DREAM Act." Now, we passed the "DREAM Act" through the House last year when Democrats were in control. But even though it received a majority of votes in the Senate, it was blocked when several Republicans who had previously supported the "DREAM Act" voted no.
And in order for us to make sure that that opportunity is available for everyone, it means we're going to have to make ourselves more competitive, because we now face a 21st-century economy that is not like the economy that we grew up in. And it means we're going to have to make investments in education and step up our game and increase our college graduation rates. It means we've got to rebuild our infrastructure. We used to have the best infrastructure in the world, and we no longer do. And that will put us over the long term at a competitive disadvantage. And by the way, we can put a lot of people to work, doing the work that America needs done, rebuilding roads and bridges, but also broadband lines and a smart grid and high-speed rail.
We've made the largest investment in education in our history. We haven't just put more money into our education system, but we've demanded accountability and reform, and in some cases, broken some china within the Democratic Party, saying that this is too important for us to be held back by dogma and ideology.
Today, four out of five students at the school earn a diploma. Seventy percent continue their education, many the first in their families to go to college. So Booker T. Washington High School is no longer a story about what's gone wrong in education. It's a story about how we can set it right.
We need to encourage this kind of change all across America. We need to reward the reforms that are driven not by Washington, but by principals and teachers and parents. That's how we'll make progress in education, not from the top down, but from the bottom up. And that's the guiding principle of the Race to the Top competition my administration started 2 years ago.
And if anyone doubts this, they ought to head to Booker T. Washington High. They ought to meet the inspiring young people who overcame so much and worked so hard to earn their diplomas in a school that believed in their promise and gave them the opportunity to succeed. We need to give every child in America that chance. That's why education reform matters.
So part of what I'd like to see is actually more tourism maybe organized through school trips and others for people from outside of rural areas to appreciate what's happening in rural areas. Where are they getting their food from? It doesn't just show up in cellophane in a supermarket. Somebody is growing that. And part of the challenge is America has become so productive agriculturally that you now only have a couple percent of the people who are actively involved in farming. Ninety-eight percent of people, they just eat. [Laughter] And I think a county fair can be a powerful education tool, and I'd like to see more kids just coming out here and be able to appreciate all the hard work that goes into the food on their table. And so maybe that's something that your outstanding Governor might want to work on. All right?
What I say to the American people is that we are moving in the right direction, it is going to take time to heal all the problems that exist out there, the health care bill that we passed is absolutely the right thing to do but it's going to take awhile before it's even fully implemented, much less taken full effect, and you start seeing health care inflation stabilize. When it comes to education we're doing great reforms at the elementary and secondary levels but it could take 10 years before we start seeing the full effects of education reform taking place. That's why the jobs bill is so important because even as we're doing these structural reforms that put us in a stronger position in the long terms, we still have to help people now and the most important thing we can do right now is to make sure we're putting people back to work.
And that's just a fact, that the truth of the matter is that on a series of very important measures that could make a big difference, the most prominent being right now is putting people back to work, rebuilding our infrastructure, getting teachers back in the classroom, we haven't seen that attitude of cooperation that's necessary. The fact of the matter is, in the absence of some Republican support, they are able to block proposals even if they have gotten the support of the majority of American people. Sixty-three percent of the American people support the elements of my jobs plan, they support the idea that we should have the best infrastructure in the world. They support the idea that we shouldn't be firing teachers at time when we know education is the most important thing we can do to make sure our kids can compete in this economy. And yet, even though we've gotten a majority of senators in the Senate willing to move forward on this, because of the filibuster, because of the rules that are set up in the Senate, those things are blocked.
What I am certain of, though, is that there's going to be a very clear contrast between whoever they nominate and their vision of where we should take the country and where I believe we should take the country. I think that on a whole host of issues, whether it's Wall Street reform, whether it's that we're investing in education or rebuilding our infrastructure, whether it's how we approach reducing our deficit. Are we going to do it in a balanced way or are we going to do it on the backs of our seniors or the middle class or the poor? On a whole range of these issues, there's going to be a clear choice for the American people to make.
Now, Chesterfield's been lucky. It isn't facing layoffs right now. But a lot of these guys have seen their pay frozen. You've got cities in States like Michigan and New Jersey that have had to lay off big chunks of their forces. That means that firefighters can't always get to fires before they become major fires, and that makes their job more dangerous. It means police officers can't respond to every crime. And when giving our children the best education possible we know is the ingredient for success in this new information- and technology-rich economy, how can we be laying off teachers when other countries are hiring teachers in droves? It's unfair to our kids. It undermines our future.
Secretary Duncan, who is here, Secretary Salazar, they're going to work together on this effort to prepare Native American youth to compete for the high-skilled, good jobs of tomorrow. We're going to find ways to reduce the dropout rate. We're going to help students who've already dropped out reenter the education system. And we're going to strengthen our tribal colleges and universities. They are cornerstones of their community, and they deserve our support.
So we've made progress together. And a lot of that progress is possible because of all of you, because the ideas that you've shared at the last two conferences and that you're sharing at this conference. And that's why I'm looking forward to hearing the results of the discussion that you have today. I want to know what we can do to keep tackling the tough issues, from education to jobs to health care to public safety.
But our objectives are common, which is we want to make sure that we have a--we have governments that are lean, that are effective, that are efficient, that are providing opportunity to our people, that are properly paid for so that we're not leaving it to the next generation. And we want to make sure that ultimately our citizens in both our countries are able to pursue their dreams and opportunities by getting a good education and being able to start a small business, being able to find a job that supports their families and allows them to retire with dignity and respect.

And so this notion that somehow two different countries are going to have identical economic programs doesn't take into account profound differences in position. But the objectives, the goals, the values I think are the same. And I'm confident that because of the resilience of our people and our businesses and our workers, our systems of higher education, that we are both countries that are incredibly well positioned to succeed in this knowledge-based economy of the 21st century.

Keep in mind, I have never been somebody who believes that government can or should try to solve every problem. Some of you know my first job in Chicago was working with a group of Catholic churches that often did more good for the people in their communities than any government program could. In those same communities, I saw that no education policy, however well crafted, can take the place of a parent's love and attention.
For generations, nearly all of these investments--from transportation to education to retirement programs--have been supported by people in both parties. As much as we might associate the GI bill with Franklin Roosevelt or Medicare with Lyndon Johnson, it was a Republican, Lincoln, who launched the transcontinental railroad, the National Academy of Sciences, land-grant colleges. It was Eisenhower who launched the Interstate Highway System and new investment in scientific research. It was Richard Nixon who created the Environmental Protection Agency, Ronald Reagan who worked with Democrats to save Social Security. It was George W. Bush who added prescription drug coverage to Medicare.
Show me a business leader who wouldn't profit if more Americans could afford to get the skills and education that today's jobs require. Ask any company where they'd rather locate and hire workers: a country with crumbling roads and bridges or one that's committed to high-speed Internet and high-speed railroads and high-tech research and development?
And yet, for much of the last century, we have been having the same argument with folks who keep peddling some version of trickle-down economics. They keep telling us that if we'd convert more of our investments in education and research and health care into tax cuts--especially for the wealthy--our economy will grow stronger. They keep telling us that if we'd just strip away more regulations and let businesses pollute more and treat workers and consumers with impunity, that somehow we'd all be better off. We're told that when the wealthy become even wealthier and corporations are allowed to maximize their profits by whatever means necessary, it's good for America, and that their success will automatically translate into more jobs and prosperity for everybody else. That's the theory.
So we've tried this theory out. And you would think that after the results of this experiment in trickle-down economics, after the results were made painfully clear, that the proponents of this theory might show some humility, might moderate their views a bit. You'd think they'd say, you know what, maybe some rules and regulations are necessary to protect the economy and prevent people from being taken advantage of by insurance companies or credit card companies or mortgage lenders. Maybe, just maybe, at a time of growing debt and widening inequality, we should hold off on giving the wealthiest Americans another round of big tax cuts. Maybe when we know that most of today's middle class jobs require more than a high school degree, we shouldn't gut education or lay off thousands of teachers or raise interest rates on college loans or take away people's financial aid.
If this budget becomes law and the cuts were applied evenly, starting in 2014, over 200,000 children would lose their chance to get an early education in the Head Start program. Two million mothers and young children would be cut from a program that gives them access to healthy food. There would be 4,500 fewer Federal grants at the Department of Justice and the FBI to combat violent crime, financial crime, and help secure our borders. Hundreds of national parks would be forced to close for part or all of the year. We wouldn't have the capacity to enforce the laws that protect the air we breathe, the water we drink, or the food that we eat.
That's just a partial sampling of the consequences of this budget. Now, you can anticipate Republicans may say, well, we'll avoid some of these cuts, since they don't specify exactly the cuts that they would make. But they can only avoid some of these cuts if they cut even deeper in other areas. This is math. If they want to make smaller cuts to medical research, that means they've got to cut even deeper in funding for things like teaching and law enforcement. The converse is true as well. If they want to protect early childhood education, it will mean further reducing things like financial aid for young people trying to afford college.
Let's just step back for a second and look at what $150,000 pays for: a year's worth of prescription drug coverage for a senior citizen, plus a new school computer lab, plus a year of medical care for a returning veteran, plus a medical research grant for a chronic disease, plus a year's salary for a firefighter or police officer, plus a tax credit to make a year of college more affordable, plus a year's worth of financial aid. A hundred fifty thousand dollars could pay for all of these things combined: investments in education and research that are essential to economic growth that benefits all of us. For $150,000, that would be going to each millionaire and billionaire in this country. This budget says we'd be better off as a country if that's how we spent it.
This congressional Republican budget is something different altogether. It is a Trojan horse. Disguised as deficit reduction plans, it is really an attempt to impose a radical vision on our country. It is thinly veiled social Darwinism. It is antithetical to our entire history as a land of opportunity and upward mobility for everybody who's willing to work for it, a place where prosperity doesn't trickle down from the top, but grows outward from the heart of the middle class. And by gutting the very things we need to grow an economy that's built to last--education and training, research and development, our infrastructure--it is a prescription for decline.
So let's look at Bowles-Simpson. Essentially, my differences with Bowles-Simpson were I actually proposed less revenue and slightly lower defense spending cuts. The Republicans want to increase defense spending and take in no revenue, which makes it impossible to balance the deficit under the terms that Bowles-Simpson laid out, unless you essentially eliminate discretionary spending. You don't just cut discretionary spending. Everything we think of as being pretty important--from education to basic science and research to transportation spending to national parks to environmental protection--we'd essentially have to eliminate.
We do have to take care of our deficits. I think Christine has spoken before, and I think most economists would argue as well, that the challenge when it comes to our deficits is not short-term discretionary spending, which is manageable. As I said before and I want to repeat, as a percentage of our GDP, our discretionary spending--all the things that the Republicans are proposing cutting--is actually lower than it's been since Dwight Eisenhower. There has not been some massive expansion of social programs, programs that help the poor, environmental programs, education programs. That's not our problem.
So, in the end, I come back to something Elie said that day we visited Buchenwald together. Reflecting on all that he had endured, he said: "We had the right to give up. We had the right to give up on humanity, to give up on culture, to give up on education, to give up on the possibility of living one's life with dignity, in a world that has no place for dignity." They had that right. Imagine what they went through. They had the right to give up. Nobody would begrudge them that. Who would question someone giving up in such circumstances?

A basic belief that if you're doing what you need to do—because we're not a country that believes in handouts, we believe in working for what we get—that you're able to find a job that supports a family, get a home that you can call your own; that you're able to send your kids to get a good education and, hopefully, allow them to go to college and they can achieve and succeed in ways you might not have even imagined; that you won't go bankrupt when you get sick; that you'll be able to retire with dignity and respect. That's the idea that built this country. That's the idea that turned us into a economic powerhouse.

So right now their main prescription for growing the economy faster is an additional $5 trillion in tax cuts, most of which would go to the wealthiest Americans, even if to pay for it you'd have to gut education programs or turn Medicare into a voucher program or eliminate our investments in basic research and science. That's their vision about how you grow an economy.

So let me just close by saying this, and then we can get to some questions. My vision says we're going to invest in education and we're going to hire new teachers, especially in math and science, open up 2 million more slots for folks to go to community colleges to get trained in the jobs that businesses are hiring for right now. We already helped to make sure that students—student loan rates didn't double, but now we've got to work more to lower tuition costs so young people aren't burdened with debt.

So we're going to invest in education. We're going to invest in American energy. Yes, we want to continue to expand our production of oil and natural gas, but I also want to make sure that we are the leaders in solar and wind and biodiesel, the energy of the future that can help reduce our dependence on foreign oil.

So my strong belief is that it is important for us to focus on individual issues of fairness, but also recognize that we all have common interests as well. Your son is 18; I'm assuming he's going to get some more education, and I'm assuming you guys are worrying right now about making sure he doesn't come out with a whole bunch of debt, and how——

What's true is also we've got, as I said, two different visions about how to move the country forward. But my hope is that this election allows us to, once and for all, resolve some of the bigger questions about how we move the country forward, because right now we've got as stark a choice as you could imagine. I believe in investing in education and transportation and science and research and bringing down our deficits in a balanced way, and changing our Tax Code to make sure that companies that are investing here are doing better.

The President. Well, first of all, thank you for teaching. Most important job there is. We appreciate that. Second of all, I want to be very clear. When I say everybody needs a higher education, I don't mean everybody has got to take a 4-year college education. The point is that, these days, if you want to be a plumber, if you want to be an electrician, you want to be working in a factory, you are generally going to need a little bit more training than high school provides, which is why our community college system is so important.

But you are absolutely right that one of the, I believe, mistakes we made 20, 30 years ago was to start deemphasizing vocational education, because not everybody wants to sit in a classroom with a book. A lot of folks want to do stuff. And right now we've got shortages of folks in fields that need technical training, but don't necessarily require a 4-year college degree.

So today I'm announcing a major overhaul of our Transition Assistance Program. We're going to set up a kind of "reverse boot camp" for our departing servicemembers. Starting this year, they'll get more personalized assistance as they plan their careers. We'll provide the training they need to find that job or pursue that education or start that business. And just as they've maintained their military readiness, we'll have new standards of "career readiness."

In addition, by making the post-9/11 GI bill a priority, we've helped more than 800,000 veterans and their families pursue their education. And I've issued an Executive order to help put a stop to schools that are ripping off our veterans.

Now, the people I worked with in those early days in Chicago, they were looking for the same thing that Americans everyplace aspire to. We're not a nation of people who are looking for handouts. We certainly don't like bailouts. [Laughter] We don't believe government should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves, and we recognize not every government program works. But we do expect hard work to pay off. We do expect responsibility to be rewarded. We do expect that if you put in enough effort, you should be able to find a job that pays the bills. You should be able to own a home you call your own. You should be able to retire in dignity and respect. You should be able to afford the security of health care, and you should be able to give your kids the best education possible.

But it also begins with an early childhood education, which is why we've invested more in childcare, and in programs like Early Head Start and Head Start that help prepare our young people for success. It's the right thing to do for America.

Our education policy hasn't just been based on more money, we've also called for real reform. So we challenged every State in the country to raise their standards for teaching and for learning. And 3 years later, nearly every State has answered the call. We have seen the biggest transformation in terms of school reform in a generation, and we've helped some of the country's lowest performing schools make real gains in reading and math, including here in New Orleans.

We've made it our mission to make a higher education more affordable for every American who wants to go to school. That's why we fought to extend our college tuition tax credit for working families, saving millions of families thousands of dollars.

That's why tomorrow I'm establishing the first-ever White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for African Americans, so that every child has greater access to a complete and competitive education from the time they're born all through the time they get a career.

And that's why we're pushing all colleges and universities to cut their costs, because we can't keep asking taxpayers to subsidize skyrocketing tuition. A higher education in the 21st century cannot be a luxury. It is a vital necessity that every American should be able to afford. I want all these young people to be getting a higher education, and I don't want them loaded up with tens of thousands of dollars of debt just to get an education. That's how we make America great.

The President. Jeremy, first of all, your future is bright. And the fact that you're making an investment in higher education is critical not just to you, but to the entire Nation. Now, the most important thing we can do is to make sure that we are creating jobs in this country, but not just jobs, good-paying jobs, ones that can support a family.
Number two, we've got to make sure that we have the best education system in the world. And the fact that you're going to college is great, but I want everybody to get a great education. And we've worked hard to make sure that student loans are available for folks like you. But I also want to make sure that community colleges are offering slots for workers to get retrained for the jobs that are out there right now and the jobs of the future.
We've got to reduce our deficit, but we've got to do it in a balanced way, asking the wealthy to pay a little bit more along with cuts so that we can invest in education like yours. And let's take the money that we've been spending on war over the last decade to rebuild America: roads, bridges, schools. We do those things, not only is your future going to be bright, but America's future is going to be bright as well.
My grandmother, she started off as a secretary in a bank. She never got a college education even though she was smart as a whip. And she worked her way up to become a vice president at a local bank, but she hit the glass ceiling. She trained people who would end up becoming her bosses during the course of her career. She didn't complain. That's not what you did in that generation.
It also means that we've got to make sure that young people like yourself are able to afford a college education. Earlier, Governor Romney talked about—he wants to make Pell grants and other education accessible for young people. Well, the truth of the matter is, is that that's exactly what we've done. We've expanded Pell grants for millions of people, including millions of young women all across the country. We did it by taking $60 billion that was going to banks and lenders as middlemen for the student loan program, and we said, let's just cut out the middleman. Let's give the money directly to students. And as a consequence, we've seen millions of young people be able to afford college, and that's going to make sure that young women are going to be able to compete in that marketplace.
Now, does that mean you're not struggling? Absolutely not. A lot of us are. And that's why the plan that I've put forward for manufacturing and education and reducing our deficit in a sensible way, using the savings from ending wars to rebuild America and putting people back to work, making sure that we are controlling our own energy, but not just the energy of today, but also the energy of the future—all those things will make a difference.
So the point is, the commitments I've made, I've kept. And those that I haven't been able to keep, it's not for lack of trying, and we're going to get it done in a second term. But you should pay attention to this campaign, because Governor Romney has made some commitments as well, and I suspect he'll keep those too. When Members of the Republican Congress say, we're going to sign a no-tax pledge so that we don't ask a dime from millionaires and billionaires to reduce our deficit so we can still invest in education and helping kids go to college, he said, me too.
What I believe is, we have to do, as the President mentioned towards the end of his remarks there, which is to make enormous efforts to enforce the gun laws that we have and to change the culture of violence we have. And you ask, how are we going to do that? And there are a number of things. He mentioned good schools. I totally agree. We were able to drive our schools to be number one in the Nation in my State, and I believe if we do a better job in education, we'll give people the hope and opportunity they deserve and perhaps less violence from that.
And, Candy, we haven't had a chance to talk about education much, but I think it is very important to understand that the reforms we've put in place, working with 46 Governors around the country, are seeing schools that are some of the ones that are the toughest for kids starting to succeed; we're starting to see gains in math and science.
When it comes to community colleges, we are setting up programs, including with Nassau Community College, to retrain workers, including young people who may have dropped out of school, but now are getting another chance, training them for the jobs that exist right now. And in fact, employers are looking for skilled workers, and so we're matching them up, giving them access to higher education. As I said, we have made sure that millions of young people are able to get an education that they weren't able to get before. Now——
A lot of things go in—are involved in that, Jake. So making sure they've got decent health care and making sure they've got a good education, making sure that their parents have jobs—those are all relevant as well. Those aren't just sort of side issues. But there's no doubt that this has to be a central issue. And that's exactly why I'm confident that Joe is going to take this so seriously over the next couple months.

In 2011, Congress passed a law saying that if both parties couldn't agree on a plan to reach our deficit goal, about a trillion dollars' worth of budget cuts would automatically go into effect this year. These sudden, harsh, arbitrary cuts would jeopardize our military readiness. They'd devastate priorities like education and energy and medical research. They would certainly slow our recovery and cost us hundreds of thousands of jobs. And that's why Democrats, Republicans, business leaders, and economists have already said that these cuts—known here in Washington as the sequester—are a really bad idea.
Now, some in Congress have proposed preventing only the defense cuts by making even bigger cuts to things like education and job training, Medicare, and Social Security benefits. That idea is even worse.
To hit the rest of our deficit reduction target, we should do what leaders in both parties have already suggested and save hundreds of billions of dollars by getting rid of tax loopholes and deductions for the well-off and the well-connected. After all, why would we choose to make deeper cuts to education and Medicare just to protect special interest tax breaks? How is that fair? Why is it that deficit reduction is a big emergency justifying making cuts in Social Security benefits, but not closing some loopholes? How does that promote growth?
And that has to start at the earliest possible age. Study after study shows that the sooner a child begins learning, the better he or she does down the road. But today, fewer than 3 in 10 4-year-olds are enrolled in a high-quality preschool program. Most middle class parents can't afford a few hundred bucks a week for a private preschool. And for poor kids who need help the most, this lack of access to preschool education can shadow them for the rest of their lives. So tonight I propose working with States to make high-quality preschool available to every single child in America. That's something we should be able to do.
Every dollar we invest in high-quality early childhood education can save more than 7 dollars later on: by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing violent crime. In States that make it a priority to educate our youngest children, like Georgia or Oklahoma, studies show students grow up more likely to read and do math at grade level, graduate high school, hold a job, form more stable families of their own. We know this works. So let's do what works and make sure none of our children start the race of life already behind. Let's give our kids that chance.
And 4 years ago, we started Race to the Top, a competition that convinced almost every State to develop smarter curricula and higher standards, all for about 1 percent of what we spend on education each year. Tonight I'm announcing a new challenge to redesign America's high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high-tech economy. And we'll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and employers and create classes that focus on science, technology, engineering, and math: the skills today's employers are looking for to fill the jobs that are there right now and will be there in the future.
Now, even with better high schools, most young people will need some higher education. It's a simple fact: The more education you've got, the more likely you are to have a good job and work your way into the middle class. But today, skyrocketing costs price too many young people out of a higher education or saddle them with unsustainable debt.
Through tax credits, grants, and better loans, we've made college more affordable for millions of students and families over the last few years. But taxpayers can't keep on subsidizing higher and higher and higher costs for higher education. Colleges must do their part to keep costs down, and it's our job to make sure that they do.
So tonight I ask Congress to change the Higher Education Act so that affordability and value are included in determining which colleges receive certain types of Federal aid. And tomorrow my administration will release a new college scorecard that parents and students can use to compare schools based on a simple criterion: where you can get the most bang for your educational buck.
Now, to grow our middle class, our citizens have to have access to the education and training that today's jobs require. But we also have to make sure that America remains a place where everyone who's willing to work—everybody who's willing to work hard—has the chance to get ahead.
Let's offer incentives to companies that hire Americans who've got what it takes to fill that job opening, but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance anymore. Let's put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in rundown neighborhoods. And this year, my administration will begin to partner with 20 of the hardest hit towns in America to get these communities back on their feet. Now, we'll work with local leaders to target resources at public safety and education and housing.
We will keep faith with our veterans, investing in world-class care—including mental health care—for our wounded warriors, supporting our military families, giving our veterans the benefits and education and job opportunities that they have earned. And I want to thank my wife Michelle and Dr. Jill Biden for their continued dedication to serving our military families as well as they have served us. Thank you, honey. Thank you, Jill.
We need to make sure that we've got shared responsibility for giving every American the chance to earn the skills and education that they need for a really competitive, global job market.
As I said on Tuesday night, that education has to start at the earliest possible age. And that's what you have realized here in Decatur. [Applause] Study after study shows that the earlier a child begins learning, the better he or she does down the road. But here's the thing: We are not doing enough to give all of our kids that chance. The kids we saw today that I had a chance to spend time with in Mary's classroom, they're some of the lucky ones, because fewer than 3 in 10 4-year-olds are enrolled in a high-quality preschool program.
Most middle class parents can't afford a few hundred bucks a week for private preschool. And for the poor children who need it the most, the lack of access to a great preschool education can have an impact on their entire lives. And we all pay a price for that. And as I said, this is not speculation. Study after study shows the achievement gap starts off very young. Kids who, when they go into kindergarten, their first day, if they already have a lot fewer vocabulary words, they don't know their numbers and their shapes and have the capacity for focus, they're going to be behind that first day. And it's very hard for them to catch up over time.
Every dollar we invest in high-quality early education can save more than 7 dollars later on: boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, reducing violent crime. In States like Georgia that have made it a priority to educate our youngest children, States like Oklahoma, students don't just show up in kindergarten and first grade more prepared to learn, they're also more likely to grow up reading and doing math at grade level, graduating from high school, holding a job, even forming more stable families.
Hope is found in what works. This works. We know it works. If you are looking for a good bang for your educational buck, this is it, right here.
Michelle and I remember how tough it can be to find good childcare. I remember how expensive it can be too. The size of your paycheck, though, shouldn't determine your child's future. So let's fix this. Let's make sure none of our kids start out the race of life already a step behind. Let's make it a national priority to give every child access to a high-quality early education. Let's give our kids that chance.
Now, what I also said on Tuesday night is that our commitment to our kids' education has to continue throughout their academic lives. So from the time our kids start grade school, we need to equip them with the skills they need to compete in a high-tech economy. That's why we're working to recruit and train 100,000 new teachers in the fields of the future: in science and technology and engineering and math, where we are most likely to fall behind.
And obviously, once our kids graduate from high school, we've got to make sure that skyrocketing costs don't price middle class families out of a higher education or saddle them with unsustainable debt. I mean, some of the younger teachers who are here, they've chosen a career path that is terrific, but let's face it, you don't go into teaching to get rich. [Laughter] And it is very important that we make sure that they can afford to get a great education and can choose to be a teacher, can choose to be in a teaching profession.
So we've worked to make college more affordable for millions of students and families already through tax credits and grants and loans that go farther than before. But taxpayers can't keep subsidizing ever-escalating price tags for higher education. At some point you run out of money. So colleges have to do their part. And colleges that don't do enough to keep costs in check should get less Federal support, so that we're incentivizing colleges to think about how to keep their costs down.
Now, in the end, that's what this is all about: giving our kids the best possible shot at life; equipping them with the skills, education that a 21st-century economy demands; giving them every chance to go as far as their hard work and God-given potential will take them.
Those parents—those parents supporting kids—that's the single most important thing. Unconditional love for your child, that makes a difference. If a child grows up with parents who have work and have some education and can be role models and can teach integrity and responsibility and discipline and delayed gratification—all those things give a child the kind of foundation that allows them to say, my future, I can make it what I want. And we've got to make sure that every child has that, and in some cases, we may have to fill the gap and the void if children don't have that.
We also know, though, that there is no surer path to success in the middle class than a good education. And what we now know is that that has to begin in the earliest years. Study after study shows that the earlier a child starts learning, the more likely they are to succeed: the more likely they are to do well at Hyde Park Academy; the more likely they are to graduate; the more likely they are to get a good job; the more likely they are to form stable families and then be able to raise children themselves who get off to a good start.
Chicago already has a competition, thanks to what the mayor is doing, that rewards the best preschools in the city; so Rahm has already prioritized this. But what I've also done is say, let's give every child across America access to high-quality, public preschool. Every child, not just some. Every dollar we put into early childhood education can save $7 down the road by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, reducing violent crime, reducing the welfare rolls, making sure that folks who have work, now they're paying taxes. All this stuff pays back huge dividends if we make the investment. So let's make this happen. Let's make sure every child has the chance they deserve.
So we know how important families are. We know how important education is. We recognize that government alone can't solve these problems of violence and poverty, that everybody has to be involved. But we also have to remember that the broader economic environment of communities is critical as well. For example, we need to make sure that folks who are working now, often in the hardest jobs, see their work rewarded with wages that allow them to raise a family without falling into poverty.
First of all, we'll work with local leaders to cut through redtape and improve things like public safety and education and housing. And we'll bring all the resources to bear in a coordinated fashion so that we can get that tipping point where suddenly a community starts feeling like things are changing and we can come back.
Second of all, if you're willing to play a role in a child's education, then we'll help you reform your schools. We want to seed more and more partnerships of the kind that Rahm is trying to set up.
We all have a lot on our plate, everything from our immigration system to our education system. As Joe talked about, our goal is to make sure that we can be an effective partner with you.
So while you are in town, I hope that you speak with your congressional delegation and remind them in no uncertain terms exactly what is at stake and exactly who is at risk. Because here's the thing: These cuts do not have to happen. Congress can turn them off any time with just a little bit of compromise. To do so, Democrats like me need to acknowledge that we're going to have to make modest reforms in Medicare if we want the program there for future generations and if we hope to maintain our ability to invest in critical things like education, research, and infrastructure.
That's how Governor O'Malley in Maryland put his State on track to all but eliminate his deficit while keeping tuition down and making Maryland's public schools among the best in America 5 years running. That's how Governor Haslam balanced his budget last year in Tennessee while still investing in key areas like education for Tennessee's kids. Like the rest of us, they know we can't just cut our way to prosperity. Cutting alone is not an economic policy. We've got to make the tough, smart choices to cut what we don't need so that we can invest in the things that we do need.
The second priority that I want to talk about is education, and in particular, education that starts at the earliest age. I want to partner with each of you to make high-quality preschool available to every child in America.
Now, this is an area where we've already seen great bipartisan work at the State level. I was just in Governor Deal's State to highlight this issue because Georgia has made it a priority to educate our youngest kids. And in the school district where I visited in Decatur, Georgia, you're already seeing closing of the achievement gap. Kids who are poor are leveling up. And everybody is seeing real improvement, because it's high-quality, early childhood education.
Every dollar we invest in early childhood education can save more than 7 dollars later on: boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing incidents of violent crime.
And again, I'm not the first person to focus on this. Governor Bentley has made this a priority in Alabama. Governor Snyder is making it a priority in Michigan. Governor Tomblin has made this a priority in West Virginia. Even in a time of tight budgets, Republicans and Democrats are focused on high-quality early childhood education. We want to make sure that we can be an effective partner in that process.
We should be able to do that for every child, everywhere—Democrat, Republican, blue State, red State—it shouldn't matter. All of us want our kids to grow up more likely to read and write and do math at grade level, to graduate high school, hold a job, and form more stable families of their own. That will be better for every State. That will be better for this country. That's what high-quality early childhood education can deliver. And I hope that you're willing to partner with us to make that happen.
Forty-two States have introduced laws that would ban or severely limit access to a woman's right to choose; laws that would make it harder for women to get the contraceptive care that they need; laws that would cut off access to cancer screenings and end educational programs that help prevent teen pregnancy.
The only way the problem does get fixed is if both parties sit down and they say: How are we going to make sure that we're reducing our deficit sensibly? How are we making sure that we're investing in things like rebuilding our airports and our roads and our bridges and investing in early childhood education, all the—basic research, all the things that are going to help us grow? And that's what the American people want.
We're working to help our troops earn the credentials they need for jobs in manufacturing and medicine and transportation. We strengthened the post-9/11 GI bill, helping nearly 1 million veterans and military family members get a college education. And for the first time in 20 years, we've overhauled the military's Transition Assistance Program to help our newest veterans compete for those private sector jobs. Our online Veterans Jobs Bank now has more than 2.5 million searchable job postings. With our Veterans Gold Card, our veterans receive 6 months of personalized career counseling. At my direction, the Federal Government has hired nearly 250,000 veterans.
Thirdly, we have agreed to boost our economy and our potential; we have agreed to create a bilateral forum on higher education, innovation, and research. Two government agencies will work together—CONACYT and the National Science Foundation from the U.S.—and presidents from Mexico and U.S. universities will be part of this group. And by this, more exchanges will happen between Mexico and the U.S., and students coming from the U.S. to Mexico.
We have agreed that higher education serves as a platform to boost the economic potential that we have in our nations. In order to compete with the world, specifically with highly developed countries where science and technology have been the target of their efforts and investment, it is fundamental that we have well-prepared youngsters with the skills necessary to give our economic development a greater strength and a greater capacity.
And finally, of course, in our Costa Rican agenda, we included issues having to do with education, entrepreneurship, and innovation.
And I finish by talking about the subject of an interpartnership of innovation and of the education as essential elements of any agenda for the development. For Costa Rica, the education has been a constant in its historical development. And as I was telling President Obama, we were born as one of the poorest provinces of the colony, and we have become, little by little, in—the nation with great opportunities in the subject of economic development and of well-being for the people, and a fundamental factor, an essential factor has been precisely the education.
Much more—much before many other nations of the world, Costa Rica decreed the free and mandatory access to education. And now we dedicate 7 percent of our GDP to finance the public education, and we need, above all, to face the challenge of the reallocation of this education to the demands of the new economy to which we are aspiring to move our country.
In that sense, we have called upon the attention in regard to the possibility of using—with a greater intensity—the very beautiful program that has been characterized by the international policy of the United States, which is the Peace Corps, so that, through them, we might be able to improve even more. They have programs of bilingualism that Costa Rica, for 15 or 20 years, we have already been introducing in our public education.
Finally, also, we have called President Obama's attention to the fact that there is nothing more valuable, that there is nothing more important than anybody to get to know a society from the inside. I am a true example precisely of the benefits of the scholarship programs that the United States in the past have offered the Central American region. As a matter of fact, that is why we have made a summit so that we can continue on promoting those scholarship programs and intensify them so that the youth of the Central American region—and of course, of my country—can continue on also knowing or feeding of not only for knowledge of the best universities, of the quality of education of the United States, but also of the livelihood, the values that have characterized this great nation.
Meanwhile, as I said in Mexico yesterday, the United States recognizes that we've got responsibilities; that much of the violence in the region is fueled by demand for illegal drugs, including in the United States. So we're going to keep on pursuing a comprehensive approach not only through law enforcement, but also through education and prevention and treatment that can reduce demand.
And so what President Chinchilla and I spoke extensively about are initiatives like education, institution-building and capacity, trying to create greater economic opportunity, because the stronger the economies and the institutions for legitimate—for individuals who are seeking legitimate careers, the more those are there, then the less powerful these narcotrafficking operations are going to be.
And so not only are we interested in promoting trade and highlighting the already extensive trade that we're doing, but we also want to see how can we build on the successes to improve education even in our strategies to fight narcotrafficking. We, for example, helped to finance youth centers that can give young people a different vision for their futures. We consider that to be part of our overall effort. So it can't just be law enforcement. It also has to be human development, inclusive economic development. We've got to make sure that everybody feels opportunity.
Finally, we're expanding the already strong ties between our young people. As an engineer by training, President Park knows the importance of education. Madam President, you've said—and I'm quoting you—"We live in an age where a single individual can raise the value of an entire nation." I could not agree more. So I'm pleased that we're renewing exchange programs that bring our students together. And as we pursue commonsense immigration reform here in the United States, we want to make it easier for foreign entrepreneurs and foreign graduate students from countries like Korea to stay and contribute to our country, just as so many Korean Americans already do.
And we very much appreciate her visit and look forward to excellent cooperation not only on this issue, but on the more positive issues of economic and commercial ties between our two countries, educational exchanges, work on energy, climate change, helping other countries develop.
Now, there are three things that we've got to focus on to create more jobs and opportunity for the middle class. First of all, we've got to make America a magnet for good jobs. Second, we've got to help people earn the education and develop the skills they need to do those jobs. And number three, we've got to make sure that people who are working hard are able to achieve a decent living. All right? That's what we've got to focus on.
And I've sent Congress proposals on a whole range of ideas that will help in these three areas: creating jobs, helping families stay in their homes, lifting wages, helping more young people get a good education and afford college. But some of them have been blocked in Congress for frankly political reasons. And I'm going to keep on trying. I'm a very—I'm an optimistic guy, so I'm just going to keep on talking to Members of Congress, because I believe that America does best when we work together. I believe that.
Every young person in America deserves a world-class education. We've got an obligation to give it to them. And, by the way, that helps the whole economy. Every business in America, we want to draw from the world's highest skilled and most educated workforce. We can make that happen. But we're going to have to put our shoulder against the wheel and work a little harder than we're doing right now as a nation.
Every dollar that we put into early childhood education can save $7 down the road because it boosts graduation rates, reduces things like teen pregnancy and violent crime, helps young people succeed not just in high school, but beyond. So let's make that happen. Let's make every child's early success a recipe for long-term success. We can do that.
And finally, we know that even with better high schools, if you want a good job and work your way into the middle class, most young people are going to need some higher education. Unfortunately, in recent years, college costs have skyrocketed, and that's left too many students and their families saddled with a mountain of debt. So we've worked to make college more affordable for millions of students already and families through tax credits and grants, more access to student loans that go farther than before. We've reformed the student loan process by putting students ahead of big banks, providing options to make it easier for young people to repay these loans.
But even if we do all that, if the price of higher education keeps going up, then eventually, there's not going to be enough money to help young people. So we've got to figure out how to reduce college costs. And that's why my administration has released what we're calling a college scorecard that gives parents and students the clear, concise information that you'll need to find a school that best fits your needs, but also gives you the best value. Gives you the best value. It's like a consumer report for colleges, because you don't want a lemon, and you don't want too much debt.
And going forward, colleges that don't do enough to keep costs down, I think, should get less taxpayer support. We want to support the schools that are doing a great job giving good value to students. That's what we want. And young people and families, you shouldn't have to subsidize skyrocketing costs if the colleges aren't trying hard enough to keep costs down and provide a high-quality education.
Well, Manor, that's what every school should be. That's what our country should be: caring for each other, helping each another, being invested in each other's success. We're not just a collection of individuals, we're one American family. And if we follow Manor's example, if we give every child the chance to climb new ladders of opportunity, if we equip every American with the skills and education they need to succeed in the jobs of the future, if we make sure that hard work pays off and responsibility is rewarded, and if we fight to keep America a place where you can make it if you try, then you're not just going to be the ones who prosper, we'll all prosper. And together, we'll write the next great chapter in America's history.
Now is the time to act boldly and wisely to not only revive this economy, but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity. Now is the time to jump-start job creation, restart lending, and invest in areas like energy, health care, and education that will grow our economy, even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit down. That is what my economic agenda is designed to do, and that is what I'd like to talk to you about tonight. It's an agenda that begins with jobs.
You see, the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy. The ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to a college education, how stores stock their shelves, farms buy equipment, and businesses make payroll.
We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril and claimed opportunity from ordeal. Now we must be that nation again, and that is why, even as it cuts back on programs we don't need, the budget I submit will invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future: energy, health care, and education.
The third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise of education in America. In a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, a good education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity, it is a prerequisite. Right now, three-quarters of the fastest growing occupations require more than a high school diploma. And yet, just over half of our citizens have that level of education. We have one of the highest high school dropout rates of any industrialized nation, and half of the students who begin college never finish.
This is a prescription for economic decline, because we know the countries that out-teach us today will outcompete us tomorrow. That is why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education, from the day they are born to the day they begin a career. That is a promise we have to make to the children of America.
Already, we've made historic investment in education through the economic recovery plan. We've dramatically expanded early childhood education and will continue to improve its quality, because we know that the most formative learning comes in those first years of life. We've made college affordable for nearly 7 million more students--7 million. And we have provided the resources necessary to prevent painful cuts and teacher layoffs that would set back our children's progress.
It is our responsibility as lawmakers and as educators to make this system work. But it is the responsibility of every citizen to participate in it. So tonight I ask every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training. This can be community college or a 4-year school, vocational training or an apprenticeship. But whatever the training may be, every American will need to get more than a high school diploma.
Now, I know that the price of tuition is higher than ever, which is why if you are willing to volunteer in your neighborhood or give back to your community or serve your country, we will make sure that you can afford a higher education. And to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future generations, I ask Congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that bears the name of Senator Orrin Hatch, as well as an American who has never stopped asking what he can do for his country, Senator Edward Kennedy.
These education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children, but it is up to us to ensure they walk through them. In the end, there is no program or policy that can substitute for a parent, for a mother or father who will attend those parent-teacher conferences or help with homework or turn off the TV, put away the video games, read to their child. I speak to you not just as a President, but as a father, when I say that responsibility for our children's education must begin at home. That is not a Democratic issue or a Republican issue; that's an American issue.
In this budget, we will end education programs that don't work and end direct payments to large agribusiness that don't need them. We'll eliminate the no-bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq and reform our defense budget so that we're not paying for cold war-era weapons systems we don't use. We will root out the waste and fraud and abuse in our Medicare program that doesn't make our seniors any healthier. We will restore a sense of fairness and balance to our Tax Code by finally ending the tax breaks for corporations that ship our jobs overseas.
Good morning. Even if these were the best of times, budget reform would be long overdue in Washington, and we have here some folks who have been working on these issues for a long time. But these are far from the best of times. By any measure, my administration inherited a fiscal disaster. When we walked in the door, we found a budget deficit of $1.3 trillion, the largest in American history. And this fiscal burden has been compounded by the most severe economic crisis since the Great Depression. It's a crisis that requires us to take swift and aggressive action to put Americans back to work and to make the long-delayed investments in energy, health care, and education that can build a new foundation for growth.
For we know that economic progress and educational achievement have always gone hand in hand in America. The land-grant colleges and public high schools transformed the economy of an industrializing nation. The GI bill generated a middle class that made America's economy unrivaled in the 20th century. Investments in math and science under President Eisenhower gave new opportunities to young scientists and engineers all across the country. It made possible somebody like a Sergey Brin to attend graduate school and found an upstart company called Google that would forever change our world.
The source of America's prosperity has never been merely how ably we accumulate wealth, but how well we educate our people. This has never been more true than it is today. In a 21st century world where jobs can be shipped wherever there's an Internet connection, where a child born in Dallas is now competing with a child in New Delhi, where your best job qualification is not what you do, but what you know, education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity and success, it's a prerequisite for success.
That's why workers without a 4-year degree have borne the brunt of recent layoffs, Latinos most of all. That's why, of the 30 fastest growing occupations in America, half require a bachelor's degree or more. By 2016, 4 out of every 10 new jobs will require at least some advanced education or training.
So let there be no doubt: The future belongs to the nation that best educates its citizens. And my fellow Americans, we have everything we need to be that nation. We have the best universities, the most renowned scholars. We have innovative principals and passionate teachers and gifted students, and we have parents whose only priority is their child's education. We have a legacy of excellence and an unwavering belief that our children should climb higher than we did.
And yet, despite resources that are unmatched anywhere in the world, we've let our grades slip, our schools crumble, our teacher quality fall short, and other nations outpace us. Let me give you a few statistics. In eighth grade math, we've fallen to ninth place. Singapore's middle schoolers outperform ours three to one. Just a third of our 13- and 14-year-olds can read as well as they should. And year after year, a stubborn gap persists between how well white students are doing compared to their African American and Latino classmates. The relative decline of American education is untenable for our economy, it's unsustainable for our democracy, it's unacceptable for our children, and we can't afford to let it continue.
What's at stake is nothing less than the American Dream. It's what drew my father and so many of your fathers and mothers to our shores in pursuit of an education. It's what led Linda Brown and Gonzalo and Felicitas Mendez to bear the standard of all who were attending separate and unequal schools. It's what has led generations of Americans to take on that extra job, to sacrifice the small pleasures, to scrimp and save wherever they can, in hopes of putting away enough, just enough, to give their child the education that they never had. It's that most American of ideas, that with the right education, a child of any race, any faith, any station, can overcome whatever barriers stand in their way and fulfill their God-given potential.
For decades, Washington has been trapped in the same stale debates that have paralyzed progress and perpetuated our educational decline. Too many supporters of my party have resisted the idea of rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, even though we know it can make a difference in the classroom. Too many in the Republican Party have opposed new investments in early education, despite compelling evidence of its importance. So what we get here in Washington is the same old debate about it's more money versus more reform, vouchers versus the status quo. There's been partisanship and petty bickering, but little recognition that we need to move beyond the worn fights of the 20th century if we're going to succeed in the 21st century.
I think you'd all agree that the time for finger-pointing is over. The time for holding us--holding ourselves accountable is here. What's required is not simply new investments, but new reforms. It is time to expect more from our students. It's time to start rewarding good teachers, stop making excuses for bad ones. It's time to demand results from government at every level. It's time to prepare every child, everywhere in America, to outcompete any worker, anywhere in the world. It's time to give all Americans a complete and competitive education from the cradle up through a career. We've accepted failure for far too long. Enough is enough. America's entire education system must once more be the envy of the world, and that's exactly what we intend to do.
That's exactly what the budget I'm submitting to Congress has begun to achieve. Now, at a time when we've inherited a trillion-dollar deficit, we will start by doing a little housekeeping, going through our books, cutting wasteful education programs. My outstanding Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, who's here today--stand up, Arne, so everybody can see you. I'm assuming you also saw my Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. But Secretary Duncan will use only one test when deciding what ideas to support with your precious tax dollars: It's not whether an idea is liberal or conservative, but whether it works. And this will help free up resources for the first pillar of reforming our schools, investing in early childhood initiatives.
This isn't just about keeping an eye on our children, it's about educating them. Studies show that children in early childhood education programs are more likely to score higher in reading and math, more likely to graduate from high school and attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job. For every dollar we invest in these programs, we get nearly $10 back in reduced welfare rolls, fewer health care costs, and less crime. That's why the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that I signed into law invests $5 billion in growing Early Head Start and Head Start, expanding access to quality childcare for 150,000 more children from working families and doing more for children with special needs. And that's why we are going to offer 55,000 first-time parents regular visits from trained nurses to help make sure their children are healthy and prepare them for school and for life.
Now, even as we invest in early childhood education, let's raise the bar for early learning programs that are falling short. Now, today, some children are enrolled in excellent programs, some children are enrolled in mediocre programs, and some are wasting away their most formative years in bad programs. That includes the one-fourth of all children who are Hispanic, and who will drive America's workforce of tomorrow, but who are less likely to have been enrolled in an early childhood education program than anyone else.
So that's the first pillar of our education reform agenda. The second, we will end what has become a race to the bottom in our schools and instead spur a race to the top by encouraging better standards and assessments. Now, this is an area where we are being outpaced by other nations. It's not that their kids are any smarter than ours, it's that they are being smarter about how to educate their children. They're spending less time teaching things that don't matter and more time teaching things that do. They're preparing their students not only for high school or college, but for a career; we are not. Our curriculum for eighth graders is two full years behind top performing countries. That's a prescription for economic decline. And I refuse to accept that America's children cannot rise to this challenge. They can, and they must, and they will meet higher standards in our time.
That's inexcusable. That's why I'm calling on States that are setting their standards far below where they ought to be to stop low-balling expectations for our kids. The solution to low test scores is not lowering standards, it's tougher, clearer standards. Standards like those in Massachusetts, where eighth graders are--[applause]--we've got the Massachusetts contingent here--[laughter]--in Massachusetts, eighth graders are now tying for first, first in the whole world in science. Other forward-thinking States are moving in the same direction by coming together as part of a consortium. And more States need to do the same. And I'm calling on our Nation's Governors and State education chiefs to develop standards and assessments that don't simply measure whether students can fill in a bubble on a test, but whether they possess 21st century skills like problem-solving and critical thinking and entrepreneurship and creativity.
Of course, raising standards alone will not make much of a difference unless we provide teachers and principals with the information they need to make sure students are prepared to meet those standards. And far too few States have data systems like the one in Florida that keep track of a student's education from childhood through college. And far too few districts are emulating the example of Houston and Long Beach and using data to track how much progress a student is making and where that student is struggling. That's a resource that can help us improve student achievement and tell us which students had which teachers so we can assess what's working and what's not. That's why we're making a major investment in this area, that we will cultivate a new culture of accountability in America's schools.
Now, that leads me to the fourth part of America's education strategy, promoting innovation and excellence in America's schools. One of the places where much of that innovation occurs is in our most effective charter schools. And these are public schools founded by parents, teachers, and civic or community organizations with broad leeway to innovate, schools I supported as a State legislator and a United States Senator.
Of course, no matter how innovative our schools or how effective our teachers, America cannot succeed unless our students take responsibility for their own education. That means showing up for school on time, paying attention in class, seeking out extra tutoring if it's needed, staying out of trouble. To any student who's watching, I say this: Don't even think about dropping out of school. Don't even think about it.
So today I'm issuing a challenge to educators and lawmakers, parents and teachers alike: Let us all make turning around our schools our collective responsibility as Americans. And that will require new investments in innovative ideas. That's why my budget invests in developing new strategies to make sure at-risk students don't give up on their education, new efforts to give dropouts who want to return to school the help they need to graduate, and new ways to put those young men and women who have left school back on a pathway to graduation.
Now, the fifth part of America's education strategy is providing every American with a quality higher education, whether it's college or technical training. Never has a college degree been more important; never has it been more expensive. And at a time when so many of our families are bearing enormous economic burdens, the rising cost of tuition threatens to shatter dreams. And that's why we will simplify Federal college assistance forms so it doesn't take a Ph.D. to apply for financial aid.
In just a single generation, America has fallen from 2d place to 11th place in the portion of students completing college. That is unfortunate, but it's by no means irreversible. With resolve and the right investments, we can retake the lead once more. And that's why, in my address to the Nation the other week, I called on Americans to commit to at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020. And to meet that goal, we are investing $2.5 billion to identify and support innovative initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students persist and graduate.
So let's not stop at education with college. Let's recognize a 21st century reality: Learning doesn't end in our early twenties. Adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees and new skills, especially in the current economic environment. And that means working with all our universities and schools, including community colleges--a great and undervalued asset--to prepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries and to improve access to job training not only for young people who are just starting their careers, but for older workers who need new skills to change careers. And that's going to be one of the key tasks that Secretary Solis is involved with, is making sure that lifelong learning is a reality and a possibility for more Americans.
It's through initiatives like these that we'll see more Americans earn a college degree or receive advanced training and pursue a successful career. And that's why I'm calling on Congress to work with me to enact these essential reforms and to reauthorize the Workforce Reinvestment Act. That's how we will round out a complete and competitive education in the United States of America.
You know, when you're a kid you don't think about the sacrifices they're making. She had to work; I just had to go to school. But she'd still wake up every day to make sure I was getting what I needed for my education. And it's because she did this day after day, week after week, because of all the other opportunities and breaks that I got along the way, all the sacrifices that my grandmother and my grandfather made along the way, that I can stand here today as President of the United States. It's because of the sacrifices--[applause]. See, I want every child in this country to have the same chance that my mother gave me, that my teachers gave me, that my college professors gave me, that America gave me.
It was heartbreaking that a girl so full of promise was so full of worry that she and her class titled their video, "Is Anybody Listening?" So today there's something I want to say to Yvonne and her class at Village Academy: I am listening; we are listening; America is listening. And we will not rest until your parents can keep your jobs--we will not rest until your parents can keep their jobs and your families can keep their homes, and you can focus on what you should be focusing on, your own education; until you can become the businessmen, doctors, and lawyers of tomorrow, until you can reach out and grasp your dreams for the future.
Because we know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, this budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability in our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anyone who wants it.
The President. Well, I say our challenges are too large to ignore. The cost of health care is too high to ignore. The dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that got us to this point. I didn't run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation or the next President. I ran for President to solve these problems so that you've got a better shot at life.
So I will--and I will also say this, that my obligation is to make sure that we've improved our economy, that we've gotten serious on health care, made significant progress on energy, made education more affordable, and improved the excellence of our educational system K-12, that we have started controlling our deficits.
So what we've tried to do is to say, let's, right now, just focus on getting the economy back on track, reducing unemployment, creating jobs, making sure our school systems still have teachers, cops are still on the streets, firefighters are still in the station house. Let's do what we need to do to get through this difficult time. Let's make some investments in health care, energy, education that will lay the foundation for long-term economic growth. But let's also start making some tough choices about the deficit as soon as we get out of this recovery.
The President. Well, look, we--most of--almost all of the money that's going to States under the Recovery Act for education is designed to retain teachers. Almost--the lion's share of it, I mean, there's some money for school construction as well, and there's some money for innovation, because we can't just put more money into the schools without also reforming the schools and making them better.
One last point I want to make about education. This budget that we are now arguing about--and you're going to be hearing a bunch of arguments about, oh, you know, Obama, he's a spendthrift, et cetera, et cetera--we reduce nondefense discretionary spending as a percentage of gross domestic product, but what we insist on is that we make some investments in education.
And I haven't--and one of the things that we haven't talked about is higher education. I've said we've got to increase student loans, student grants, the Pell grant program. That's got to be a priority. That's our future, and I'm going to fight for it. I don't care how long it takes; we're going to make it more affordable to go to college, because that's what everybody needs.
Already, we're seeing a burst of refinancing. Refinancing applications jumped 30 percent last week to more than double the rate we had last fall, saving the average homeowner hundreds of dollars a month, the equivalent of a generous tax cut. That's money in their pocket, money you can use right now to pay your bills or pay off your debts or save up for a rainy day, to save for retirement or that college education for your child.
We know and we've got three principals right here in the front row--we know that--we know and they know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow. And that's why my budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability for our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anybody who wants it.
Listen, here's what I say. I say our challenges are too big to ignore. The cost of our health care is too high to ignore. Our dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that led us to this point in the first place. And I did not run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation. I ran for President to solve these problems for the next generation and for the next President. So I--that's what you want.
So the only way that we can initiate true health care reform is if we control costs. And one of the most important ways for us to control costs is to deal with the issue of prevention, which means making sure that we have proper nutrition programs in our schools, making sure that we've got effective physical education programs for our children. It means making sure that everybody has access to a primary care doctor and that they are getting regular checkups, that we are avoiding preventable diseases like diabetes that are helping to shoot our medical costs through the roof.
The President. Well, you are exactly right, that we need everybody. And every program that we have has to be thinking on the front end, how do we make sure that it is inclusive and building into it our ability to draw on the capacities of persons with disabilities. That's true on the education front where our recovery package increases funding for children with disabilities. It is true in terms of how Hilda Solis, our Secretary of Labor, will be thinking about our training programs, to make sure that we are not excluding from training for high-tech jobs--the new jobs of the future--persons with disability. It means enforcing the ADA and fighting back on some of--court opinions that have tried to narrow, in ways that I think are inappropriate, the original intent of that legislation.
The President. Well, this is why--before we came on, the Governor and I were talking. And the fact is, is that we are massively ramping up education spending at the Federal level, on a whole variety of fronts. But historically most education funding is done at the State level, at the local level.
So we may be able to take education funding at the Federal level from 7 percent to 9 percent, for example, but the lion's share is still going to be coming locally. And that's why it's so important for everybody to be engaged in the various initiatives that are going to be coming up, to make sure that what you just articulated, the need to invest in our kids, that that is reflected in terms of State budgets.
So the reason I make that point is you can't ask local elected officials to raise teachers' salaries and cut taxes and balance the budget and increase roads. At some point you've got to make some choices. So if you want a high quality education--and California historically had the best education system in the country--then somebody has got to pay for it.
And when it comes to education--and I'm speaking to teachers here and educators--let me say this--I want to do some truth-telling here. Uh-oh. [Laughter] I love teachers. There is no profession that is more important than teaching. My sister is a teacher, but--and I am a huge supporter of the teachers' unions. They were some of my first supporters. But let me tell you, you can't just be talking more money, more money, without also talking about how are we going to reform and make the system better. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money.
Now, before I get off the topic of the education, let me do a little more truth-telling. Parents, you can't complain about the schools and complain about the teachers, but when your child comes home, they're playing video games and not doing homework, and you don't have time to go to your teacher and parent--teacher-parent meeting. Our parents have to instill a sense of excellence and a thirst for knowledge.
And the truth of the matter is, even as overcrowded as schools may be, as poor the computer equipment may be, if you took a bunch of kids right now from China or India and you put them in these classrooms, from their perspective these would be unbelievable schools. I mean, they don't have better facilities, but they're out-performing us in math and science. Why is that? Well, part of it is, is that we as parents are not insisting and demanding on the kind of higher performance from our kids. So everybody has got to be more accountable in order to improve our education system.
The second thing is keep paying attention to the debates that are taking place right now, so when we have a big budget debate--I want everybody who was paying so much attention during the election to be as interested--what's going on in terms of education spending, what's going on in terms of higher health care spending, are the investments we're planning to make on energy, are they right ones? Because, again, we're going to have some tough choices to make.
The last point I want to make--I expect that over the next couple of weeks, maybe even next week, we are going to be in a position to sign a national service bill coming from the House and the Senate, and as part of this, what we're going to be doing is expanding programs like the Peace Corps and Teach For America and other mechanisms, other avenues where you can make a decision as a young person to teach for 3 years or to serve in the Peace Corps or to serve in the Foreign Service or volunteer in some fashion in your communities and help finance your education in the process. And I think there are young people all across California, all across America, who are interested in that opportunity, and I want to give that opportunity to you.
The President. Yes. She looks very nice. [Laughter] Well, let me--as I said before, Ethan, we're going to do everything we can to protect our teachers. We already passed a law in Washington that's going to give more money to the State to help keep teachers in their jobs. And one of the things that we didn't talk about earlier, we're also going to be putting more money into school construction, because there are a lot of overcrowded schools and overcrowded classrooms that don't--aren't wired for the Internet effectively. And we are going to make sure that we invest in that as well, because I want you to get a first-class education.
What I've said here in Washington is that we've got to make some tough choices; we got to make some tough budgetary choices. What we can't do, though, is sacrifice long-term growth, investments that are critical to the future. And that's why my budget focuses on health care, energy, education, the kinds of things that can build a foundation for long-term economic growth, as opposed to the fleeting prosperity that we've seen over the last several years.
The President. Well, I've emphasized repeatedly what I expect out of this budget. I expect that there's serious efforts at health care reform and that we are driving down costs for families and businesses and, ultimately, for the Federal and State governments that are going to be broke if we continue on the current path. I've said that we've got to have a serious energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy. We've got to invest in education, K-12 and beyond, to upgrade the skills of the American worker so we can compete in the international economy. And I've said that we've got to start driving our deficit numbers down.
The President. No, I--what I said was I haven't seen yet what provisions are in there. The bottom line is, is that I want to see health care, energy, education, and serious efforts to reduce our deficit--our budget deficit. And there are going to be a lot of details that are still being worked out, but I have confidence that we're going to be able to get a budget done that's reflective of what needs to happen in order to make sure that America grows.
Now, none of us know exactly what's going to happen 6 or 8 or 10 years from now. Here's what I do know: If we don't tackle energy, if we don't improve our education system, if we don't drive down the costs of health care, if we're not making serious investments in science and technology and our infrastructure, then we won't grow 2.6 percent, we won't grow 2.2 percent. We won't grow.
And so, what we're trying to emphasize is, let's make sure that we're making the investments that we need to grow, to meet those growth targets. At the same time, we're still reducing the deficit by a couple of trillion dollars; we are cutting out wasteful spending in areas like Medicare; we're changing procurement practices when it comes to the Pentagon budget; we are looking at social service programs and education programs that don't work and eliminate them. And we will continue to go line by line through this budget, and where we find programs that don't work we will eliminate them.
But I'm--look, I'm not going to lie to you, it is tough. As I said, that's why the critics tend to criticize, but they don't offer an alternative budget. Because even if we were not doing health care, we were not doing energy, we were not doing education, they'd still have a whole bunch of problems in those out-years, according to CBO projections. The only difference is that we will not have invested in what's necessary to make this economy grow.
And so I would ask people to be confident about their own futures. And that may mean, in some cases, spending now as investments for the future. There's been a debate back home about our budget. In the midst of this crisis, should we deal with health care? Should we deal with energy? Should we deal with education? And one of the analogies I've used is a family who is having a difficult time--and I actually get letters like this occasionally from voters--one of our parents has lost their job, savings have declined, and so I'm wrestling with whether or not I should go to college, because that will require me taking out a lot of debt, and maybe it would be more responsible for me to go find any job that I can to help the family.
Strasbourg has been known throughout history as a city at the crossroads. Over thousands of years, you straddled many kingdoms and many cultures. Two rivers are joined here. Two religions have flourished in your churches. Three languages comprise an ancient oath that bears the city's name. You've served as a center of industry and commerce, a seat of government and education, where Goethe studied and Pasteur taught and Gutenberg imagined his printing press.
And so my question concerns the many children all over the world that live in poverty, under human rights violations. They have hunger; they have no education and other problems. So what is your strategy, Mr. President, to solve this problem?
Over the long term, though, we've got to have a strategy that recognizes that the interest of the developed world in feeding the hungry, in educating children, that that's not just charity; it's in our interests. There's not a direct correlation between poverty and violence and conflict and terrorism. But I can tell you that if children have no education whatsoever, if young men are standing idle each and every day and feel completely detached and completely removed from the modern world, they are more likely--they are more susceptible to ideologies that appeal to violence and destruction.
Make no mistake, though: Iraq, Turkey, and the United States face a common threat from terrorism. That includes the Al Qaida terrorists who have sought to drive Iraqis apart and destroy their country. That includes the PKK. There is no excuse for terror against any nation. As President and as a NATO ally, I pledge that you will have our support against the terrorist activities of the PKK or anyone else. Now, these efforts will be strengthened by the continued work to build ties of cooperation between Turkey, the Iraqi Government, and Iraq's Kurdish leaders, and by your continued efforts to promote education and opportunity and democracy for the Kurdish population here inside Turkey.
Above all--above all we will demonstrate through actions our commitment to a better future. I want to help more children get the education that they need to succeed. We want to promote health care in places where people are vulnerable. We want to expand the trade and investment that can bring prosperity for all people. In the months ahead, I will present specific programs to advance these goals. Our focus will be on what we can do, in partnership with people across the Muslim world, to advance our common hopes and our common dreams. And when people look back on this time, let it be said of America that we extended the hand of friendship to all people.
Now, this is when the crisis spread from Wall Street to Main Street. After all, the ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to, as you all well very--know very well, a college education. It's how stores stock their shelves and farms buy equipment and businesses make payroll. So when banks stopped lending money, businesses started laying off workers. When laid-off workers had less money to spend, businesses were forced to lay off even more workers. When people couldn't get a car loan, a bad situation at the auto companies became even worse. When people couldn't get home loans, the crisis in the housing market only deepened. Because the infected securities were being traded worldwide and other nations also had weak regulations, this recession soon became global. And when other nations can't afford to buy our goods, it slows our economy even further.
For even as too many were out there chasing ever-bigger bonuses and short-term profits over the last decade, we continued to neglect the long-term threats to our prosperity: the crushing burden that the rising cost of health care is placing on families and businesses; the failure of our education system to prepare our workers for a new age; the progress that other nations are making on clean energy industries and technologies while we remain addicted to foreign oil; the growing debt that we're passing on to our children. Even after we emerge from the current recession, these challenges will still represent major obstacles that stand in the way of our success in the 21st century. So we've got a lot of work to do.
It's a foundation built upon five pillars that will grow our economy and make this new century another American century: number one, new rules for Wall Street that will reward drive and innovation, not reckless risk-taking; number two, new investments in education that will make our workforce more skilled and competitive; number three, new investments in renewable energy and technology that will create new jobs and new industries; number four, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses; and number five, new savings in our Federal budget that will bring down the debt for future generations. That's the new foundation we must build. That's our house built upon a rock. That must be our future, and my administration's policies are designed to achieve that future.
The second pillar of this new foundation is an education system that finally prepares our workers for a 21st century economy. You know, in the 20th century, the GI bill helped send a generation to college. For decades, we led the world in educational attainment, and as a consequence, we led the world in economic growth. But in this new economy, we've come to trail the world's leaders in graduation rates, in educational achievement, in the production of scientists and engineers. That's why we have set a goal that will greatly enhance our ability to compete for the high-wage, high-tech jobs of the 21st century. By 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. That is the goal that we have set, and we intend to meet it.
Now, to meet that goal, we have to start early. So we've already dramatically expanded early childhood education. We are investing in innovative programs that have proven to help schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. We're creating new rewards that tie teachers' performance and new pathways for advancement. And I've asked every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training, and we have provided tax credits to make a college education more affordable for every American, even those who attend Georgetown.
Already we've identified $2 trillion dollars in deficit reductions over the next decade. We need to do more, but we've already done that. We've announced procurement reform that will greatly reduce no-bid contracts and save the Government $40 billion. We need to do more, but that's an important start. Secretary Gates recently announced a courageous set of reforms that go right at the hundreds of billions of dollars in waste and cost overruns that have bloated our defense budget without making America safer. We need to do more, but that proposal by Secretary Gates is right on target. We will end education programs that don't work. We will root out waste and fraud and abuse in our Medicare program.
Second, in tackling the deficit issue, we simply cannot sacrifice the long-term investments that we so desperately need to generate long-term prosperity. That's the argument that some critics have made: "Well, you're proposing health care reform, you shouldn't be doing that; you're proposing education investments, you shouldn't be doing that. That adds to the deficit."
I believe we can and must do exactly that. Over the course of our first hundred days in office, my administration has taken aggressive action to confront a historic economic crisis. We're doing everything that we can to create jobs and to get our economy moving while building a new foundation for lasting prosperity, a foundation that invests in quality education, lowers health care costs, and develops new sources of energy powered by new jobs and industries.
And so we're going to have to set what I'm calling a new foundation for growth, where people are less reliant on debt, they're living more within their means; businesses are engaging in more sensible business practices, they're investing in the future and the long-term and not short-term profits; we are focusing on clean energy; we're reforming our health care system; we are boosting our education system to produce more engineers and more scientists and retraining our workers so that we've got the most productive workers in the world. That's the strategy that we're going to be pursuing in the months and years to come.
But as impressive and meaningful as Judge Sotomayor's sterling credentials in the law are, her extraordinary life journey is even more exceptional. Born in the South Bronx--[applause]--raised in a--hey, South Bronx. We got everybody here. We got Searchlight, we got South Bronx. [Laughter] All right, I'm not going to shout out everybody's--[applause]. Where was I? [Laughter] I'm talking about the next Supreme Court Justice, born in the South Bronx, raised in a housing project by parents who came to New York from Puerto Rico during the Second World War. Father was a factory worker with a third grade education, didn't speak English. When Sonia was just 9, her father passed away. Her mother worked 6 days a week as a nurse to provide for Sonia and her brother, buying the only encyclopedias in the neighborhood, sending their children to Catholic school out of a belief that with a good education here in America all things are possible.
And that's why I'm here tonight, because I can't bring the change I promised all by myself. I can't rebuild an economy by myself. I can't reform our health care system and education systems and preserve our environment and keep our Nation safe all alone. That's not how it works. I need partners in Congress, leaders who are determined to make a difference for the folks they represent. And right now, more than ever before, we need their help. America needs their help. We need their help to build schools that meet high standards and close the achievement gap and prepare our kids for the challenges of the 21st century, reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement.
We need their help to reach the goal I've set for our education in this country that by 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We need their help to pass a comprehensive energy and climate bill that will finally reduce our dangerous dependence on foreign oil, offer new energy incentives to reduce the pollution that threatens our health and our climate.
And finally, we will begin a national campaign to promote cybersecurity awareness and digital literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms and to build a digital workforce for the 21st century. And that's why we're making a new commitment to education in math and science and historic investments in science and research and development. Because it's not enough for our children and students to master today's technologies--social networking and e-mailing and texting and blogging--we need them to pioneer the technologies that will allow us to work effectively through these new media and allow us to prosper in the future. So these are the things we will do.
As a nation, we have several imperatives at this difficult moment in our history. We're confronting the worst recession this country has faced in generations, and this has required extraordinary investments in the short term. Another imperative is addressing long-deferred priorities--health care, energy, education--which threaten the American economy and the well-being of American families. And we've begun to tackle these problems as well.
And we need to rethink the cost of a medical education, and do more to reward medical students who choose a career as a primary care physician, who choose to work in underserved areas instead of the more lucrative paths. That's why we're making a substantial investment in the National Health Service Corps that will make medical training more affordable for primary care doctors and nurse practitioners so they aren't drowning in debt when they enter the workforce. [Applause] Somebody back there is drowning in debt, they were applauding. [Laughter]
Five months. Every Member of Congress who helped make these reforms possible should feel proud of what we've accomplished. But we shouldn't feel satisfied. We should feel confident in the future, but not content with the present, not when there are workers out there who are still looking for a job and families who are still unable to pay their bills. Not when there are millions of Americans who are trying to figure out whether they can afford health care and millions more of our children who are being left behind in our education system. We can't be satisfied when our Nation is not leading the world in developing a 21st century energy economy.
I need partners in Congress, leaders who are determined to make a difference for the folks they represent. And right now, more than ever before, we need their help; America needs their help. We need their help to build schools that meet high standards, and close the achievement gap, and prepare our kids for the challenges of the 21st century, where we reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement. We need their help to reach the goal that I've set for higher education in this country, that by the year 2020, America once again will have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
The President. Right. And so one of the things that we've got to figure out is how to change that calculation. Now, you may still go into primary care, and I hope you do. But I don't want to make it tougher for you; I want to make it easier for you. And one of the things that I'd like to explore--and I've been working with the administration and with Congress is--are their loan forgiveness programs where people commit to a certain number of years of primary care. That reduces the costs for their medical education. That would make a significant difference.
We passed a budget resolution that helps to cut our deficit in half while laying the foundations for all the building blocks required for a post-bubble economy: reforming our health care system, initiating a clean energy agenda, revamping our education system so that our kids can compete in the 21st century.
We also came to the conclusion that Russian-American relations and the level achieved today does not correspond to their potential, to the other possibilities of our countries. And the important thing is that the level that we have today does not correspond to the need of the current age, and without active development of our relations on the foreign affairs agenda, on scientific, trade, educational, relations, we'll not be able to build the road to the 21st century.
And third, we've taken important steps forward to broaden our cooperation on a full range of issues that affect the security and prosperity of our people. President Medvedev and I are creating a U.S.-Russian bilateral Presidential commission to serve as a new foundation for this cooperation. Too often, the United States and Russia only communicate on a narrow range of issues or let old habits within our bureaucracy stand in the way of progress. And that's why this commission will include working groups on development and the economy, energy and the environment, nuclear energy and security, arms control and international security, defense, foreign policy, and counterterrorism, preventing and handling emergencies, civil society, science and technology, space, health, education, and culture. And this work will be coordinated by Secretary Clinton and Minister Lavrov, and Secretary Clinton will travel to Russia this fall to carry this effort forward.
And beyond Afghanistan, America is committed to promoting the opportunity that will isolate extremists. We are helping the Iraqi people build a better future, and leaving Iraq to the Iraqis. We're pursuing the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, leave—living in peace and security. We're partnering with Muslim communities around the world to advance education, health, and economic development. In each of these endeavors, I believe that the Russian people share our goals, and will benefit from success—and we need to partner together.
Now, government can promote this cooperation, but ultimately, individuals must advance this cooperation, because the greatest resource of any nation in the 21st century is you. It's people—it's young people especially. And the country which taps that resource will be the country that will succeed. That success depends upon economies that function within the rule of law. As President Medvedev has rightly said, a mature and effective legal system is a condition for sustained economic development. People everywhere should have the right to do business or get an education without paying a bribe, whether they are in America or Russia or Africa or Latin America. That's not a American idea or a Russian idea; that's how people and countries will succeed in the 21st century.
You get to decide what comes next. You get to choose where change will take us, because the future does not belong to those who gather armies on a field of battle or bury missiles in the ground; the future belongs to young people with an education and the imagination to create. That is the source of power in this century. And given all that has happened in your two decades on Earth, just imagine what you can create in the years to come.
And that's why when I talk about things like health care reform or revamping how we approach energy and investing deeply in clean energy, when I talk about improving our education system, as I'll discuss today when I go to Michigan, those foundations are so critical because we've got to find new models of economic growth, particularly at a time when consumers are just not going—probably going to be spending as much as they were, and that has been driving a lot of the economic growth over the last several months.
But we also have to ensure that we're educating and preparing our people for the new jobs of the 21st century. We've got to prepare our people with the skills they need to compete in this global economy. Time and again, when we've placed our bet for the future on education, we have prospered as a result, by tapping the incredible innovative and generative potential of a skilled American workforce. That's what happened when President Lincoln signed into law legislation creating the land-grant colleges, which not only transformed higher education but also our entire economy. That's what took place when President Roosevelt signed the GI bill, which helped educate a generation and ushered in an era of unprecedented prosperity. That was the foundation for the American middle class.
And that's why, at the start of my administration I set a goal for America: By 2020, this Nation will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We used to have that. We're going to have it again. And we've begun to take historic steps to achieve this goal. Already we've increased Pell grants by $500. We've created a $2,500 tax credit for 4 years of college tuition. We've simplified student aid applications and ensured that aid is not based on the income of a job that you just lost. A new GI bill of rights for the 21st century is beginning to help soldiers coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan to begin a new life in a new economy. And the recovery plan has helped close State budget shortfalls, which put enormous pressure on public universities and community colleges, at the same time making historic investments in school libraries and classrooms and facilities all across America. So we've already taken some steps that are building the foundation for a 21st-century education system here in America, one that will allow us to compete with China and India and everybody else all around the world.
Not since the passage of the original GI bill and the work of President Truman's Commission on Higher Education, which helped to double the number of community colleges and increase by seven-fold enrollment in those colleges, have we taken such a historic step on behalf of community colleges in America. And let me be clear: We pay for this plan. This isn't adding to the deficit. We're paying for this plan by ending the wasteful subsidies we currently provide to banks and private lenders for student loans. That will save tens of billions of dollars over the next 10 years. Instead of lining the pockets of special interests, it's time this money went towards the interests of higher education in America. That's what my administration is committed to doing.
This is training to become a medical technician or a health IT worker or a lab specialist or a nurse. In fact, 59 percent of all new nurses come from community colleges. This is training to install solar panels and build those wind turbines we were talking about and develop a smarter electricity grid. And this is the kind of education that more and more Americans are using to improve their skills and broaden their horizons. And many young people are saving money by spending 2 years at community college before heading to a 4-year college. And more workers who have lost their jobs, or fear losing a job, are seeking an edge at schools like this one.
So we'll fund programs that track student progress inside and outside the classroom. Let's figure out what's keeping students from crossing that finish line and then put in place reforms that will remove those barriers. Maybe it becomes too difficult for a parent to be away from home or too expensive for a waiter or a nurse to miss a shift. Maybe a young student just isn't sure if her education will lead to employment. The point is, we need to figure out solutions for these kinds of challenges, because facing these impediments shouldn't prevent you from reaching your potential.
All right, so that's a big chunk of this first part of this initiative. The second part: We're going to back $10 billion in loans to renovate and rebuild college classrooms and buildings all across the country. All too often, community colleges are treated like the stepchild of the higher education system; they're an afterthought, if they're thought of at all. And that means schools are often years behind in the facilities they provide, which means, in a 21st-century economy, they're years behind in the education they can offer. That's a mistake, and it's one that we'll help to correct. Through this fund, schools will have the chance to borrow at a more affordable rate to modernize facilities, and they'll be building on the funds in the recovery plan that are already helping to renovate schools, including community colleges all across the country. And by the way, not only does this improve the schools and the training that they're providing, guess what? You also have to hire some workers and some trades men and women to do the work on those schools. So it means it's putting people to work in Michigan, right here right now.
Number three, even as we repair bricks and mortar, we have an opportunity to build a new virtual infrastructure to complement the education and training community colleges can offer. So we're going to support the creation of a new online, open-source clearinghouse of courses so that community colleges across the country can offer more classes without building more classrooms. And this will make a big difference, especially for rural campuses that a lot of times have struggled—attract—have to struggle to attract students and faculty. And this will make it possible for a professor to complement his lecture with an online exercise or for a student who can't be away from her family to still keep up with her coursework. We don't know where this kind of experiment will lead, but that's exactly why we ought to try it, because I think there's a possibility that online education can provide especially for people who are already in the workforce and want to retrain the chance to upgrade their skills without having to quit their job.
Only about 30 percent of the overall budget— somewhere between 25 and 30 percent—is nondefense discretionary spending. That's everything for national parks, for education, you name it. Every single program that you think of that you think of as a Government program, that is only about 25 percent of the budget. The rest of it is all Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid. And what's really going up fastest is Medicare and Medicaid.
On the education front, I just visited Martin Luther King Charter School, the first school to reopen in the Ninth Ward and an inspiration for this city. We've also worked to be a better partner and free up funding that has allowed places like this university right here, the University of New Orleans and the Southern University of New Orleans to rebuild. We're looking for ways to be more flexible, so New Orleans can build the school system it deserves. And because a lot of your public schools opened themselves up to new ideas and innovative reforms, we're actually seeing an improvement in overall achievement that is making the city a model for reform nationwide. That is good news, thanks to the hard work being done right here in New Orleans.
But the Recovery Act is just the start. If we want a recovery the lasts, if we want an economy that really grows again, we've got to rebuild stronger than before, just like you're doing here in New Orleans. We need to come together and meet the challenges that were with us before this recession hit: schools that weren't closing before the recession. That means building a clean energy economy that can lead to millions of new jobs and new industries. That means building an education system that equips every citizen with the skills and training they need to compete with any worker in the world. That means building a health care system that finally offers security to those who have insurance and affordable options to those who don't.
So I guess my point is this: I make no excuses for the fact that Federal Government did not work effectively with State and local governments immediately in the aftermath of the storm to make sure that everybody got the help they needed right away. And we are still working through the backlog of problems that exist. But you know, I will say that I think not only Democrat Mary Landrieu, but also, I think, Republican Governor Jindal will tell you that our team is outstanding, they are working really hard all the time to try to get these things resolved as quickly as possible. And my expectation is, is that by the time that my term is over, you guys are going to look back and you're going to say, this was a responsive administration on health care, on housing, on education, that actually made sure that the money flowed and that things got done the way they were supposed to get done.
But the U.S.-Japan alliance is not just focused on security—for example, disaster prevention or health, education—we had many levels—and also environmental issues as well. We need to cooperate in all these areas so as to cooperate in the Asia Pacific and others so that we can further deepen our bilateral alliance. I believe that we have reached an agreement on these points.
My own life is a part of that story. I am an American President who was born in Hawaii and lived in Indonesia as a boy. My sister Maya was born in Jakarta and later married a Chinese Canadian. My mother spent nearly a decade working in the villages of Southeast Asia, helping women buy a sewing machine or an education that might give them a foothold in the world economy. So the Pacific Rim has helped shape my view of the world.
Now, part of that vision is working together to ensure that all nations, including Iran and South—North Korea, live up to their international obligations. We agreed to expand the educational exchanges that will fuel our knowledge-based economies. We're dramatically expanding the Fulbright-Nehru program that brings so many of our students and scholars together, especially in science and technology. And we are increasing ties and exchanges between our universities and community colleges as part of a new Obama-Singh or Singh-Obama—[laughter]—21st Century Knowledge Initiative. We think it's appropriately named.
We admire the leadership that President Obama has provided to stimulate and guide the G-20 process that is now fully in place. We have decided to give a fresh impetus to collaborations in the fields of education, agriculture, and health. We will deepen our ongoing cooperation in frontier areas of science and technology, nuclear power, and space. This will open new opportunities for our universities and laboratories and create human capital to meet the global needs of the future.
Third, a just peace includes not only civil and political rights, it must encompass economic security and opportunity. For to—true peace is not just freedom from fear, but freedom from want. It is undoubtedly true that development rarely takes root without security. It is also true that security does not exist where human beings do not have access to enough food, or clean water, or the medicine and shelter they need to survive. It does not exist where children can't aspire to a decent education or a job that supports a family. The absence of hope can rot a society from within.
To advance that progress, we've sought new beginnings with Muslim communities around the world, one in which we engage on the basis of mutual interest and mutual respect and work together to fulfill the aspirations that all people share: to get an education, to work with dignity, to live in peace and security. That's what America believes in. That's the vision that is far more powerful than the hatred of these violent extremists.
We made historic investments--I know Eric Schmidt's here today, an extraordinary leader in our corporate community and in our technology communities--he knows what we've done in science and technology and a clean energy economy: historic investments, the largest that have ever been made. We made historic investments in education so that we're fully prepared to win the race for the 21st century.
Now, in Washington, $5 billion might not seem like a lot of money. But if we were to invest that money in education, it would be enough to cover the cost of annual college tuition for more than half a million students. If we were to invest in health care, it would be enough to cover 2 1/2 million children. If we were to invest it in energy, it would be enough to weatherize more than half a million homes.
Now, because of the steps we took, there are about 2 million Americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed. Two hundred thousand work in construction and clean energy. Three hundred thousand are teachers and other education workers. Tens of thousands are cops, firefighters, correctional officers, first-responders. And we're on track to add another 1 1/2 million jobs to this total by the end of the year.
Fourth, we need to invest in the skills and education of our people. Now, this year, we've broken through the stalemate between left and right by launching a national competition to improve our schools. And the idea here is simple: Instead of rewarding failure, we only reward success. Instead of funding the status quo, we only invest in reform, reform that raises student achievement, inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around failing schools that steal the future of too many young Americans, from rural communities to the inner city. In the 21st century, the best antipoverty program around is a world-class education. And in this country, the success of our children cannot depend more on where they live than on their potential. When we renew the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will work with Congress to expand these reforms to all 50 States.
That's the leadership we are providing: engagement that advances the common security and prosperity of all people. We're working through the G-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery. We're working with Muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation. We have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. We're helping developing countries to feed themselves and continuing the fight against HIV/AIDS. And we are launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease, a plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health abroad.
That's why I've proposed a more than 6-percent increase in funding for the Education Department. And this funding is tied to reforms that raise student achievement, inspire students to excel in math and science, and turn around failing schools which consign too many young people to a lesser future, because in the 21st century, there is no better antipoverty program than a world-class education.
Like any business, we're also looking for ways to get more bang for our buck by promoting innovation and cutting redtape. For example, we consolidate 38 separate education programs into 11. And last fall, we launched the SAVE Awards to solicit ideas from Federal employees about how to make Government more efficient and more effective. And I'm proud to say that a number of these ideas, like allowing Social Security appointments to be made online, made it into our budget.
Now, for example, we all agree that education is the key to a 21st-century economy. We all agree that the best antipoverty program around is a world-class education. So why don't we work together to transform our schools so that every child in America can compete with their counterparts around the world, from Beijing to Bangalore. Let's work together to upgrade our community colleges, which are the gateway to a career for so many children from so many working families. And I know we've got a lot of young people who are about to head off to college. In an era when a high school diploma is no longer a guarantee of a good job, let's make college affordable for every qualified student. As I said at the State of the Union, no graduate should have to pay more than 10 percent of his or her income on student loans each year. We can see to it that they don't. We can see to it that they don't. We've got legislation pending right now that could make this happen.
Now, that's why I continue to insist on making investments for job growth this year, why I continue to insist that we put more money into education. That's why I say we put more money into science and technology for innovation. That's why I continue to believe that we've got to invest in our infrastructure so that we are building the kind of America that can compete in the 21st century. Those are smart investments. That's like buying the new boiler; if it's busted, you got to get a new boiler. If the roof's leaking, you got to fix the roof. There's some things you've got to do. But you can put off buying the new curtains, even if it'd be nice to have. [Laughter] You know, that--remodeling the bathroom, I mean, everything's working. [Laughter] You don't need it right now. I mean, what we've been having are folks who want to buy the curtains but don't want to fix the boiler. And our priorities have to change.
But I want good ideas. It is not in my interest to bloat Government with wasteful programs, because every time I spend money on a program that doesn't work, that's money that I'm not spending on early childhood education that would make a difference in a child's life, or on college scholarships to send kids to school. We've got to use our money more wisely. But that can only be done if both parties are responding to the interests of the American people and not their short-term politics.
Having said--but I think it is a legitimate criticism to say, if you say that all of it's going to be on C-SPAN, all of it's going to be on C-SPAN. Which is why, at this point, it's important for me to say that when the Republicans put forward their proposals for what they want to do on health care and we put forward what we want to do on health care, I very much want that on C-SPAN, and I want everybody here to watch. I want everybody here to watch. Because I think it will be a good educational process for people to weigh the arguments about the relative merits of the bill instead of listening to millions of dollars' worth of insurance industry ads that have been put out there or whatever pundit on the left or the right is saying about these different issues.
And the second is, what are you going to do to help my students, who want to be teachers, who want to make a difference in this world, be able to afford a college education and not be saddled with so much debt that they're working--as many teachers in Nashua are--two jobs to make ends meet to pay their student loans?
So what does that mean? On the education front, our elementary schools, our secondary schools have been slipping. We used to have the best; now we have pockets of the best, and then we have mediocrity, and then we have some schools that are just terrible. We've got to make sure every child is getting a good, solid education. And what that means is, it means we continue to invest in early childhood education, which my budget does. It means--so that our kids are prepared when they start school. It means that we help schools with just their basic budgets. And as I said, the Recovery Act prevented a lot of layoffs and really patched holes in a lot of school budgets. It's not sexy, it doesn't get a lot of credit, but it made a huge difference.
We've got to make sure, though, also, that the single most important factor in a elementary and secondary school education is fulfilled, and that is, we've got excellent teachers in the classroom who are getting paid a good salary and are getting the support that they need.
This year is when reauthorization for what's called No Child Behind would be coming up as part of the broader education legislation that's up for reauthorization. And what we're saying there is, on the one hand, we don't want teachers just teaching to the test; on the other hand, we also want to keep high standards for our kids. And I think the best way to do that is to combine high standards, measurable outcomes, but have an assessment system that you work with teachers on so that it's not just a matter of who's filling out a bubble, and you're also taking into account where do kids start, because not every kid's going to start at the same place. So you want to see where do they end up at the end of the year.
Senator Michael F. Bennet. Thanks for coming, Mr. President. It's good to see you. You talked in the State of the Union very well about a number of the challenges that we face as a country, which are serious. I mean, even before we were driven into the worst recession since the Great Depression, the last period of economic growth in this country's history was the first time middle class family income actually fell during a period of economic growth; no net jobs created since 1998; household wealth the same at the end of the decade as it was at the beginning; and an education system that's not working well enough for our kids. And on top of everything else, got a $1.4 trillion deficit and $12 trillion of debt.
So we have to be mindful that today's job numbers, while welcome, leaves us with a lot more work to do. It will take time to achieve the strong and sustained job growth that we need. And long before this recession hit--for a decade--middle class families had already been expensing--experiencing a sense of declining economic security. Their paychecks were flatlining, even though the cost of everything, from groceries to college educations to health care, were all going up. And this means that even as we pull out of this immediate crisis, we've got to tackle some of the long-term problems that have been a drag on our economy. And that's why we've been working so hard to turn this economy around.
By the way, that's why we took on the special interests. We finally reformed the student loan system so it works for students and not bankers--saved us tens of billions of dollars in wasteful spending, and we're reinvesting that money where it should have gone in the first place, and that's to your education. We're making college more affordable, and we're upgrading America's most underappreciated asset, and that's community colleges just like this one. And we're proud to do it.
Now, there are going to be times where--there are times where I've got some differences with the unions on some issues. But that's--those are arguments among friends. I do think, for example, that it's important for us to reform our education system. And my sister's a teacher. I love teachers unions; I've been supportive of them ever since I got into politics. But I do want to partner with teachers to make sure that we are improving constantly how our kids perform. And we've got to have accountability in terms of how we are making progress in school districts all across the country.
Because I want young people in America not--at this point, we can't just graduate from high school; that's not enough. We've got to go on to community colleges or go on to a 4-year education because those are the jobs that are going to exist in the 21st century. I don't want our young people having to compete simply on the basis of their willingness to work in a factory, because it's going to be very hard for them to compete over the long term in other countries where the wages may be a lot lower unless they've got higher skills and they're bringing something different to the marketplace than some of these other workers.
The President. But I'll answer your question. You're absolutely right that we can do a great job financing community colleges and student loans and college educations, but if we haven't dealt with K through 12, we're going to have problems. And the truth is, we're slipping behind. We used to have by far the best education system in the world, by a huge margin. And we don't now. I mean, we've got some of the--we have--we still have the best universities in the world, the best college system in the world, and we have some of the best schools in the world. But our overall education system is kind of in the middle of the pack in terms of advanced countries, especially in science and math, which is a huge problem because science and math is the future. That's what's going to allow you to innovate.
So I've got this terrific Secretary of Education named Arne Duncan, and one of the things that Arne and I have been trying to do is to figure out how do we jump-start more educational excellence.
A couple of ways we've done it. First of all, the Recovery Act was also the largest investment in education by the Federal Government in history, above and beyond whatever annual funding folks get. And it helped to pay for new classrooms and new laboratories and teacher training programs and a whole host of things.
Last thing I'm going to say, and this is actually important not only about education, but about how we're going to succeed as a nation in this new century. We can have the best teachers in the world, we can fund the best programs in the world, we can give all the scholarships in the world, but if parents aren't parenting their kids and emphasizing the importance of learning and education, then it's not going to make any difference. That's the key.
So I want everybody here--as parents, as community members, as church members--to know that if we're supporting our kids and we are instilling the values of responsibility and hard work and excellence and second place isn't good enough, that's how America got built, that's how we're going to build up our education system, that's how we're going to improve our economy. Government can only do so much. We're going to be there to partner with you, but you're going to have to make it happen.
To make sure our troops, veterans, and their families have full access to the American Dreams they've fought to defend, we're working to extend them new opportunity. Michelle and Jill Biden have forged a national commitment to support military families while a loved one is away. We've guaranteed new support to caregivers who put their lives on hold for a loved one's long recovery. We're funding and implementing the post-9/11 GI bill, which is already helping some 300,000 veterans and their family members pursue their dream of a college education.
We believe in investments that will make America more competitive in the global economy, investments in education and clean energy, in research and technology. And we're making those investments.
That doesn't mean that there aren't some targeted things we can do to help communities that are especially in need. And probably the most important thing we can do, after growing the economy generally, is, how can we improve school systems in low-income communities? And I am very proud of the efforts that we've made on education reform, which have received praise from Democrats and Republicans. This is one area where actually we've seen some good bipartisan cooperation.
So we're very proud of that. And that, I think, is going to be one of the most important things we can do. It's not just, by the way, K through 12. It's also higher education. And as a consequence of a battle that we had--and it was a contentious battle--in Congress, we've been able to take tens of billions of dollars that were going to banks and financial intermediaries in the student loan program and said, we're going to give that money directly to students so that they get more help going to college. And obviously, poor kids are the ones who are going to benefit most from those programs.
And fortunately, the overwhelming majority of Muslims around the world are peace loving, are interested in the same things that you and I are interested in: How do I make sure I can get a good job? How can I make sure that my kids get a decent education? How can I make sure I'm safe? How can I improve my lot in life? And so they have rejected this violent ideology for the most part--overwhelmingly.
Having served as a State senator, having then served as a United States Senator, I had had a chance to see how economic policies were having an effect on working class families and middle class families for a long time. And my wife and I, we came out of hard-working families who didn't have a lot, but because the economy was growing, because there was an emphasis on what was good for the middle class, we were able to get a great education, we were able to get scholarships. Michelle's dad worked as a blue-collar worker, but just on that one salary he was able to provide for his family and make sure that they always had enough and the kids had opportunities.
A third area: education. A generation ago, we had the highest proportion of college graduates of any country in the world. We now rank 11th or 12th in the proportion of college graduates. Well, we can't win in an information society, in a global, technologically wired economy, unless we're winning that battle to make sure our kids can compete.
So what we've said is, we're going to put more money into higher education and through K through 12, but here's the catch: The money is only going to those communities that are serious about reforming their education system so they work well. Because it's--education is not just a matter of putting more money into it. You also have to make sure that we've got the best teachers, that we've got accountability, that the way we're designing our schools help our kids actually succeed over the long term, especially in areas of math and science, where we're lagging even further behind than we were a generation ago.
If we make investments and improve our education system; if we make investments in research and development; if we make investments in things like clean energy so that we've got an energy policy that's not just tied to importing oil from the Middle East, but instead start figuring out how can we develop our homegrown industries; if we have a tax system that is fair and helps the middle class and that also attends to our long-term deficit problems; if we regulate, but not with a heavy hand, just regulate enough to make sure that we don't have a collapse of the financial system and consumers aren't taken advantage of and health insurance companies are responsive to ordinary families--if we do those things, there's no reason why we can't succeed.
And one last thing I wanted to mention is actually education. The reason I didn't mention it up front is this has been one of the few areas where I've actually gotten some compliments from Republicans. I think the strategy that we have right now, which is to maintain high standards, work with States in a smart way to develop a--curriculums, teacher-training strategies, to boost our higher education--institutions of higher education, that's an area where we should all agree. Because it's indisputable that if we are working smarter, if our kids are better trained, then we will succeed. And if they're not, it doesn't really matter what else we do. Over time, we're going to decline.
And there are a whole host of individual issues--education and energy and what we do in terms of our foreign policy--a whole bunch of discrete issues that concerned me. What concerned me most, I think, was the nature of our economy and how the American Dream seemed as if it was slipping away for too many people.
The other thing that was happening was that we were becoming less competitive internationally, so manufacturing jobs were moving overseas. You saw countries like China and India and Brazil investing heavily in their education systems and in infrastructure. And where we used to be ranked number one, for example, in the proportion of college graduates, we now rank number 12; where we used to have--had the best public school system in the world, now our kids rank 21st in science and 25th in math. And so slowly, all the things that had made us the most productive country on Earth were starting to slip away, and we were losing that competitive position.
That's why we've put so much emphasis on education reform. And this is one area where I think that we've actually gotten some compliments from Republicans, because we're--we are not taking an ideological approach. We're saying: How do we create more accountability in the system? How do we encourage better teachers in the classroom? How do we break through some of the bureaucracy to make sure our kids are learning what they need to learn?
And I just want to use as an example the proposal that they put forward with respect to tax policy. They want to borrow $700 billion to provide tax cuts for the top 2 percent of Americans, people making more than $250,000 a year. It would mean an average of a $100,000 check to millionaires and billionaires. That's $700 billion we don't have, so we'd either have to borrow it, which would add to our deficit, or we'd have to cut, just to give you an example, about 20 percent of the amount of money that we spend on education. We'd have to cut investments we've made in clean energy. We'd have to cut investments we've made in Head Start. We'd have to cut improvements in terms of student loans for kids going to college that would affect about 8 million kids.
And so their future will be fine. But in the short term, what I'd say to them is that, first of all, we're doing everything we can to make sure that they can get the best education possible.
One of the things that we did this year that didn't get a lot of attention was we were able to change the student loan program out of the Federal Government to save about $60 billion that's going to go directly to students in the form of higher grants, reduced loan burdens--debt burdens when they get out of college. It's going to make a difference to them. So we're going to do everything we can to make sure they can succeed educationally.
I guess what my commentary comes down to is, as the Government--it gets more and more involved in business and gets more involved in taxes to pay for an awful lot of programs, what you're finding is, you're strangling those job-creation vehicles that are available; you're sort of strangling the engine that does create the jobs. We have jobs that we offer, I mean, regularly. There's always an opportunity for somebody that wants to work hard. I don't care what the background is. I don't care what the health level, what the education is, or where they came from.
The second most powerful thing I can do to reduce the poverty rate is improve our education system, because the single biggest indicator of poverty is whether or not you graduated from high school and you're able to get some sort of postsecondary education. And right now too many of our schools are failing.
So this week we spent a lot of time talking about the education reforms we've already initiated. As I said, we set up something called Race to the Top. And it was a simple idea: The Federal Government sends education dollars to schools all across the country to help them, particularly poorer schools. But what we said is, we're going to take a portion of that money--$4 billion--and we're going to say to the States, you're going to have a competition for this money. You're not automatically going to get it because of some formula. You've got to show us that you are initiating reforms that are going to recruit better teachers and train them more effectively; that are going to have greater accountability measures so you're able to track how students are doing during the course of the school year and make adjustments so that they're not just being passed along from grade to grade even though they can't read and--or do arithmetic at their grade level. We're going to encourage more charter schools and more experiments in learning across the country.
All these reform efforts that we triggered through this competition have meant that 32 States actually changed their laws. It's probably the biggest set of reforms that we've seen nationwide on public education in a generation.
So we're putting a lot of resources and effort into making sure that community colleges are constantly improving, and they're adapting their curriculum to the jobs of the future. So education and growing the economy generally, those are the most important things I can do for poverty.
Those are all things that are important, and we're going to keep on doing them. But if we can grow this economy and improve our education system, that's going to be the most important thing we can do.
A lot of folks at the age of 50, they don't need 2 years of education, but they may need 6 months where they're able to retool and get some help paying the bills and making the mortgage while they are retooling. And those are the kinds of programs that I think we need to set up.
The truth is, on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives – on health care and education and the economy – Senator McCain has been anything but independent. He said that our economy has made "great progress" under this President. He said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong. And when one of his chief advisors – the man who wrote his economic plan – was talking about the anxiety Americans are feeling, he said that we were just suffering from a "mental recession," and that we've become, and I quote, "a nation of whiners."
Now, I don't believe that Senator McCain doesn't care what's going on in the lives of Americans. I just think he doesn't know. Why else would he define middle-class as someone making under five million dollars a year? How else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million Americans? How else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people's benefits, or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college, or a plan that would privatize Social Security and gamble your retirement?
Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves – protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology.
Now is the time to finally meet our moral obligation to provide every child a world-class education, because it will take nothing less to compete in the global economy. Michelle and I are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education. And I will not settle for an America where some kids don't have that chance. I'll invest in early childhood education. I'll recruit an army of new teachers, and pay them higher salaries and give them more support. And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability. And we will keep our promise to every young American – if you commit to serving your community or your country, we will make sure you can afford a college education.
That's why this is not just a short-term program to boost employment, it's one that will invest in our most important priorities, like energy and education, health care and a new infrastructure that are necessary to keep us strong and competitive in the 21st century.
Together, with both parties in Congress, we will launch a recovery and reinvestment plan that saves or creates more than 3 million jobs while investing in priorities like health care, education, and energy that will make us strong in the future. And I will be working with the entire economic team and Tim to reform and modernize our outdated financial regulations so that a crisis like this cannot happen again. We'll put in place new commonsense rules of the road, and we will be vigilant in ensuring they are not bent or broken any longer.
THE PRESIDENT: -- what that tells me is that their ideas are bankrupt. There's no actions that they've taken that say a child in the Muslim world is getting a better education because of them, or has better health care because of them.
And the main message I have is that the statistics every day underscore the urgency of the economic situation. The American people expect action. They want us to put together a recovery package that puts people back to work, that creates investments that assure our long-term energy independence, an effective health care system, an education system that works; they want our infrastructure rebuilt, and they want it done wisely, so that we're not wasting taxpayer money.
The good news is that we are moving forward with a sense of urgency equal to the challenge. This week, the House passed the American recovery and reinvestment plan, which will save or create more than 3 million jobs over the next few years. It puts a tax cut into the pockets of working families and places a downpayment on America's future by investing in energy independence and education, affordable health care, and American infrastructure.
Now is the time for Washington to act with the same sense of urgency that Americans all across the country feel every single day. With the stakes this high, we cannot afford to get trapped in the same old partisan gridlock. That's why I've worked closely with leaders of both parties on a recovery and reinvestment plan that saves or creates more than 3 million jobs over the next 2 years, cuts taxes for 95 percent of American workers, and makes critical investments in our future--in energy and education, health care, and a 21st century infrastructure.
And that's why I feel such a sense of urgency about the economic recovery and reinvestment plan that is before Congress today. With it, we can save or create more than 3 million jobs, doing things that will strengthen our country for years to come. It's not merely a prescription for short-term spending, it's a strategy for long-term economic growth in areas like renewable energy and health care and education.
The same is true on education funding. We may be working directly with the school superintendent, who I know is here, to figure out where are the schools that are in most need of help and where we can right away get some construction going and get some improvements going. So it'll probably depend on what stream of money we're talking about, but the key is we're going to have strong oversight and strong transparency to make sure that this money is well spent.
Now, having said all that, the single most important factor I think in whether or not companies are going to continue to locate here in Elkhart and around the country is, what are we doing about education. Because the quality of the work force is probably what most companies are going to pay the most attention to over time. There are going to be some companies that just ship jobs overseas, because it's low value-added work. And they don't need skilled labor. And if you don't need skilled labor to make certain things, then you're just going to find the cheapest place. And we're never going to be able to compete against a country like Bangladesh when it comes to low-wage work.
Now, I'll be honest with you, the Senate version cut a lot of these education dollars. I would like to see some of it restored. And over the next few days, as we are having these conversations, we should talk about how we can make sure that we're investing in education, because that's what's going to keep companies investing right here in the United States over the long term. All right?
And that's why we have come together around a plan that combines hundreds of billions in tax cuts for the middle class with direct investment in areas like health care, energy, education, and infrastructure, investments that will save jobs, create new jobs and new businesses, and help our economy grow again, now and in the future.
Both Democrats and Republicans are going to have to think differently in order to come together and solve that problem. I think there are areas like education where some in my party have been too resistant to reform, and have argued only money makes a difference. And there have been others on the Republican side or the conservative side who said no matter how much money you spend, nothing makes a difference, so let's just blow up the public school systems.
And most importantly, this plan will put people to work right now by making direct investments in areas like health care and energy and education and infrastructure, investments that save jobs, and create new jobs and new businesses, and help our economy grow again.
The President. Well, it's a great question. And we put a huge emphasis on education generally and higher education in particular.
So we are going to be putting a lot of emphasis on job training, on school construction, and on financing of higher education. I think that's the highest priority. It's an example of how we can use a crisis and turn it into an opportunity. Because if we use this moment to address some things that we probably should have been doing over the last 10, 15, 20 years, then when we emerge from the crisis, the economy is going to be that much stronger.
What a spectacular evening. Michelle and I are so pleased to be here to rededicate this hallowed space. We know that Ford's Theatre will remain a place where Lincoln's legacy thrives, where his love of the humanities and belief in the power of education have a home, and where his generosity of spirit are reflected in all the work that takes place.
Only a union could foster the ingenuity of our framers--the ingenuity of our farmers, which is why he set up land-grant colleges that taught them how to make the most of their land while giving their children an education that let them dream the American Dream.
Our welfare system, before reform, too often dampened individual initiative, discouraging people from taking responsibility for their own upward mobility. In education, sometimes we've lost sight of the role of parents, rather than government, in cultivating a thirst for knowledge and instilling those qualities of good character, hard work, and discipline and integrity that are so important to educational achievement and professional success.
And one last point -- one last goal that we set out, and that was if we were going to spend this much money, our number one priority being to get jobs in place and to get the economy moving again, wouldn't it also be helpful for us to make sure that we laid some made -- that we made an investment in longterm economic growth -- that we put a down payment on things that have been deferred for too long? So if we're going to spend money on education, then can we try to introduce some reform elements into the education portion? If we are going to tackle health care by making COBRA more affordable, can we also look at health IT as a way of driving down costs over the long term? How much infrastructure can we design around clean energy?
But, again, I don't question their sincerity. I do think that over time, as we keep on reaching out, and as I think the American people express their view that we need to start actually doing something about jobs, housing, health care, education, and so forth, that there will be some counterveiling pressures to work in a more constructive way.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, look, first of all, let's get this package passed. I think it's a great start. And -- well, if you think about the number of jobs that are going to be created, the amount of progress that we can make on, let's say energy, for example, where we are doubling alternative fuels, where we are going to be retrofitting buildings to make them energy efficient, where we're providing a whole host of incentives to start innovation in new technologies; if you look at what we're going to be doing on education and teacher training and encouraging new approaches; when you look at what we're doing on health care, where we do have money now to do what every expert says, Republican and Democrat, says we should have done 10 years ago or 15 years ago, and get everybody's medical records in digital form; when you think about the roads and the bridges that are going to be repaired -- there is a lot of stuff in there that I think is going to be very helpful. And that's before you start talking about the immediate relief provided to families that are hurting.
I do think that we probably could have done more on the education innovation front. I think we could have done more with some of the health care reforms that would lower costs. I think that if you ask governors, Republican and Democrat, around the country, about their budgets, they would argue that cuts in help to the states is going to put them in a very bad bind, particularly if the economy does not turn around fairly soon. So those are all issues where again, I might have designed it a little bit differently, but ultimately this is a framework that is going to create between 3 and 4 million jobs. And that was my bottom line. I think we're going to get some good investments and I think it's an enormous accomplishment.
And that means investing in priorities like energy and health care and education that will grow our economy again. But it also means eliminating those programs that are wasteful and duplicative and that we simply cannot afford. We have to once again live within our means. We're going to have to make some tough decisions that many of you are already making in your companies but the Federal Government has not made with respect to our operations.
Because we know America can't outcompete the world tomorrow if our children are being out-educated today, we're making the largest investment in education in our Nation's history. It's an investment that will create jobs building 21st century classrooms and libraries and labs for millions of children across America. It will provide funds to train a new generation of math and science teachers, while giving aid to States and school districts to stop teachers from being laid off and education programs from being cut.
Because we know education is the single best bet we can make to change the odds of our children and our cities, we are making the largest investment in education in our Nation's history. It will prevent harmful education cuts and save jobs of tens of thousands of teachers, 14,000 just in New York City. And it will make a historic investment in early childhood education and upgrade classrooms and libraries and labs across America so that millions of our children are prepared to compete in the 21st century.
These are all extraordinary, but necessary, measures to address this economic emergency, and as has already been noted, they will come at a cost. This administration has inherited a $1.3 trillion deficit--the largest in our Nation's history--and our investments to rescue our economy will add to that deficit in the short term. We also have long-term challenges--health care, energy, education, and others--that we can no longer afford to ignore.
We are paying the price for these deficits right now. In 2008 alone, we paid $250 billion in interest on our debt, 1 in every 10 taxpayer dollars. That is more than three times what we spent on education that year, more than seven times what we spent on VA health care.
Now is the time to act boldly and wisely to not only revive this economy, but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity. Now is the time to jump-start job creation, restart lending, and invest in areas like energy, health care, and education that will grow our economy, even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit down. That is what my economic agenda is designed to do, and that is what I'd like to talk to you about tonight. It's an agenda that begins with jobs.
You see, the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy. The ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to a college education, how stores stock their shelves, farms buy equipment, and businesses make payroll.
We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril and claimed opportunity from ordeal. Now we must be that nation again, and that is why, even as it cuts back on programs we don't need, the budget I submit will invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future: energy, health care, and education.
The third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise of education in America. In a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, a good education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity, it is a prerequisite. Right now, three-quarters of the fastest growing occupations require more than a high school diploma. And yet, just over half of our citizens have that level of education. We have one of the highest high school dropout rates of any industrialized nation, and half of the students who begin college never finish.
This is a prescription for economic decline, because we know the countries that out-teach us today will outcompete us tomorrow. That is why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education, from the day they are born to the day they begin a career. That is a promise we have to make to the children of America.
Already, we've made historic investment in education through the economic recovery plan. We've dramatically expanded early childhood education and will continue to improve its quality, because we know that the most formative learning comes in those first years of life. We've made college affordable for nearly 7 million more students--7 million. And we have provided the resources necessary to prevent painful cuts and teacher layoffs that would set back our children's progress.
It is our responsibility as lawmakers and as educators to make this system work. But it is the responsibility of every citizen to participate in it. So tonight I ask every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training. This can be community college or a 4-year school, vocational training or an apprenticeship. But whatever the training may be, every American will need to get more than a high school diploma.
Now, I know that the price of tuition is higher than ever, which is why if you are willing to volunteer in your neighborhood or give back to your community or serve your country, we will make sure that you can afford a higher education. And to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future generations, I ask Congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that bears the name of Senator Orrin Hatch, as well as an American who has never stopped asking what he can do for his country, Senator Edward Kennedy.
These education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children, but it is up to us to ensure they walk through them. In the end, there is no program or policy that can substitute for a parent, for a mother or father who will attend those parent-teacher conferences or help with homework or turn off the TV, put away the video games, read to their child. I speak to you not just as a President, but as a father, when I say that responsibility for our children's education must begin at home. That is not a Democratic issue or a Republican issue; that's an American issue.
In this budget, we will end education programs that don't work and end direct payments to large agribusiness that don't need them. We'll eliminate the no-bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq and reform our defense budget so that we're not paying for cold war-era weapons systems we don't use. We will root out the waste and fraud and abuse in our Medicare program that doesn't make our seniors any healthier. We will restore a sense of fairness and balance to our Tax Code by finally ending the tax breaks for corporations that ship our jobs overseas.
And because countries that out-teach us today will outcompete us tomorrow, we must make excellence the hallmark of an American education. That's why this budget supports the historic investment in education we made as part of the recovery plan by matching new resources with new reform. We want to create incentives for better teacher performance and pathways for advancement. We want to reward success in the classroom. And we'll invest in innovative initiatives that will help schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps, preparing students for the high-paying jobs of tomorrow, but also helping them fulfill their God-given potential.
The President. — what that tells me is that their ideas are bankrupt. There's no actions that they've taken that say a child in the Muslim world is getting a better education because of them, or has better health care because of them.

I promised an education system that will prepare every American to compete, so Americans can win in a global economy. This budget will help us meet that goal, with new incentives for teacher performance and pathways for advancement, new tax credits that will make college more affordable for all who want to go, and new support to ensure that those who do go finish their degree.
Kathleen Sebelius embodies such a commitment to bipartisan accomplishment. She is, after all, the daughter of a Democratic Governor and the daughter-in-law of a Republican Congressman. But she's forged a reputation for bipartisan problem-solving in her own right. As Governor of Kansas, she inherited a billion-dollar deficit, but by eliminating waste and inefficiency while making smart choices, she balanced the State budget without raising taxes. And time and again, on energy and education, jobs and health care, she's bridged the partisan divide and worked with a Republican legislature to get things done for the people of Kansas.
One of the challenges is to jump-start lending, so businesses and families can finance the purchases of everything from inventory and payroll to a home, a car, or a college education. We have to jump-start the credit markets and get private lending going again. No matter how good of a job we do here, that's going to be critical. And that's why the Treasury and the Federal Reserve are launching today the Consumer and Business Lending Initiative, which, when fully implemented, will generate up to a trillion dollars of new lending for the American people. And this will help unlock our frozen credit markets, which is absolutely essential for economic recovery.
Good morning. Even if these were the best of times, budget reform would be long overdue in Washington, and we have here some folks who have been working on these issues for a long time. But these are far from the best of times. By any measure, my administration inherited a fiscal disaster. When we walked in the door, we found a budget deficit of $1.3 trillion, the largest in American history. And this fiscal burden has been compounded by the most severe economic crisis since the Great Depression. It's a crisis that requires us to take swift and aggressive action to put Americans back to work and to make the long-delayed investments in energy, health care, and education that can build a new foundation for growth.
The President. Good. Well, you raise a couple of important points. Number one, doctors--and I'm assuming that we've got somebody--and I'm going to call on them in a second--but I've got a lot of very close friends who are doctors. And the enormous pressure and strain that the medical profession is now feeling from a whole variety of sources is something that we've got to attend to in this reform process. We're not producing enough primary care physicians, because the costs of medical education are so high that people feel they've got to specialize.
You've done a great job by proposing an increase in nursing education in your 2010 budget and by including nurse education funding in the Recovery Act. I'd love to hear your thoughts. If not--if there's no time today, I'd love to pursue this--there are other nurses in the room--on how we can further advance nursing education and faculty training, because they are going to be essential to our overall efforts to contain costs while expanding and improving care. Thank you very much.
To restore the availability of affordable loans for families and businesses--not just banks--we are taking steps to restart the flow of credit and stabilize the financial markets. On Thursday, the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve launched the Consumer and Business Lending Initiative, a plan that will generate up to a trillion dollars of new lending so that families can finance a car or college education and small businesses can raise the capital that will create jobs.
For we know that economic progress and educational achievement have always gone hand in hand in America. The land-grant colleges and public high schools transformed the economy of an industrializing nation. The GI bill generated a middle class that made America's economy unrivaled in the 20th century. Investments in math and science under President Eisenhower gave new opportunities to young scientists and engineers all across the country. It made possible somebody like a Sergey Brin to attend graduate school and found an upstart company called Google that would forever change our world.
The source of America's prosperity has never been merely how ably we accumulate wealth, but how well we educate our people. This has never been more true than it is today. In a 21st century world where jobs can be shipped wherever there's an Internet connection, where a child born in Dallas is now competing with a child in New Delhi, where your best job qualification is not what you do, but what you know, education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity and success, it's a prerequisite for success.
That's why workers without a 4-year degree have borne the brunt of recent layoffs, Latinos most of all. That's why, of the 30 fastest growing occupations in America, half require a bachelor's degree or more. By 2016, 4 out of every 10 new jobs will require at least some advanced education or training.
So let there be no doubt: The future belongs to the nation that best educates its citizens. And my fellow Americans, we have everything we need to be that nation. We have the best universities, the most renowned scholars. We have innovative principals and passionate teachers and gifted students, and we have parents whose only priority is their child's education. We have a legacy of excellence and an unwavering belief that our children should climb higher than we did.
And yet, despite resources that are unmatched anywhere in the world, we've let our grades slip, our schools crumble, our teacher quality fall short, and other nations outpace us. Let me give you a few statistics. In eighth grade math, we've fallen to ninth place. Singapore's middle schoolers outperform ours three to one. Just a third of our 13- and 14-year-olds can read as well as they should. And year after year, a stubborn gap persists between how well white students are doing compared to their African American and Latino classmates. The relative decline of American education is untenable for our economy, it's unsustainable for our democracy, it's unacceptable for our children, and we can't afford to let it continue.
What's at stake is nothing less than the American Dream. It's what drew my father and so many of your fathers and mothers to our shores in pursuit of an education. It's what led Linda Brown and Gonzalo and Felicitas Mendez to bear the standard of all who were attending separate and unequal schools. It's what has led generations of Americans to take on that extra job, to sacrifice the small pleasures, to scrimp and save wherever they can, in hopes of putting away enough, just enough, to give their child the education that they never had. It's that most American of ideas, that with the right education, a child of any race, any faith, any station, can overcome whatever barriers stand in their way and fulfill their God-given potential.
For decades, Washington has been trapped in the same stale debates that have paralyzed progress and perpetuated our educational decline. Too many supporters of my party have resisted the idea of rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, even though we know it can make a difference in the classroom. Too many in the Republican Party have opposed new investments in early education, despite compelling evidence of its importance. So what we get here in Washington is the same old debate about it's more money versus more reform, vouchers versus the status quo. There's been partisanship and petty bickering, but little recognition that we need to move beyond the worn fights of the 20th century if we're going to succeed in the 21st century.
I think you'd all agree that the time for finger-pointing is over. The time for holding us--holding ourselves accountable is here. What's required is not simply new investments, but new reforms. It is time to expect more from our students. It's time to start rewarding good teachers, stop making excuses for bad ones. It's time to demand results from government at every level. It's time to prepare every child, everywhere in America, to outcompete any worker, anywhere in the world. It's time to give all Americans a complete and competitive education from the cradle up through a career. We've accepted failure for far too long. Enough is enough. America's entire education system must once more be the envy of the world, and that's exactly what we intend to do.
That's exactly what the budget I'm submitting to Congress has begun to achieve. Now, at a time when we've inherited a trillion-dollar deficit, we will start by doing a little housekeeping, going through our books, cutting wasteful education programs. My outstanding Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan, who's here today--stand up, Arne, so everybody can see you. I'm assuming you also saw my Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. But Secretary Duncan will use only one test when deciding what ideas to support with your precious tax dollars: It's not whether an idea is liberal or conservative, but whether it works. And this will help free up resources for the first pillar of reforming our schools, investing in early childhood initiatives.
This isn't just about keeping an eye on our children, it's about educating them. Studies show that children in early childhood education programs are more likely to score higher in reading and math, more likely to graduate from high school and attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job. For every dollar we invest in these programs, we get nearly $10 back in reduced welfare rolls, fewer health care costs, and less crime. That's why the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that I signed into law invests $5 billion in growing Early Head Start and Head Start, expanding access to quality childcare for 150,000 more children from working families and doing more for children with special needs. And that's why we are going to offer 55,000 first-time parents regular visits from trained nurses to help make sure their children are healthy and prepare them for school and for life.
Now, even as we invest in early childhood education, let's raise the bar for early learning programs that are falling short. Now, today, some children are enrolled in excellent programs, some children are enrolled in mediocre programs, and some are wasting away their most formative years in bad programs. That includes the one-fourth of all children who are Hispanic, and who will drive America's workforce of tomorrow, but who are less likely to have been enrolled in an early childhood education program than anyone else.
So that's the first pillar of our education reform agenda. The second, we will end what has become a race to the bottom in our schools and instead spur a race to the top by encouraging better standards and assessments. Now, this is an area where we are being outpaced by other nations. It's not that their kids are any smarter than ours, it's that they are being smarter about how to educate their children. They're spending less time teaching things that don't matter and more time teaching things that do. They're preparing their students not only for high school or college, but for a career; we are not. Our curriculum for eighth graders is two full years behind top performing countries. That's a prescription for economic decline. And I refuse to accept that America's children cannot rise to this challenge. They can, and they must, and they will meet higher standards in our time.
That's inexcusable. That's why I'm calling on States that are setting their standards far below where they ought to be to stop low-balling expectations for our kids. The solution to low test scores is not lowering standards, it's tougher, clearer standards. Standards like those in Massachusetts, where eighth graders are--[applause]--we've got the Massachusetts contingent here--[laughter]--in Massachusetts, eighth graders are now tying for first, first in the whole world in science. Other forward-thinking States are moving in the same direction by coming together as part of a consortium. And more States need to do the same. And I'm calling on our Nation's Governors and State education chiefs to develop standards and assessments that don't simply measure whether students can fill in a bubble on a test, but whether they possess 21st century skills like problem-solving and critical thinking and entrepreneurship and creativity.
Of course, raising standards alone will not make much of a difference unless we provide teachers and principals with the information they need to make sure students are prepared to meet those standards. And far too few States have data systems like the one in Florida that keep track of a student's education from childhood through college. And far too few districts are emulating the example of Houston and Long Beach and using data to track how much progress a student is making and where that student is struggling. That's a resource that can help us improve student achievement and tell us which students had which teachers so we can assess what's working and what's not. That's why we're making a major investment in this area, that we will cultivate a new culture of accountability in America's schools.
Now, that leads me to the fourth part of America's education strategy, promoting innovation and excellence in America's schools. One of the places where much of that innovation occurs is in our most effective charter schools. And these are public schools founded by parents, teachers, and civic or community organizations with broad leeway to innovate, schools I supported as a State legislator and a United States Senator.
Of course, no matter how innovative our schools or how effective our teachers, America cannot succeed unless our students take responsibility for their own education. That means showing up for school on time, paying attention in class, seeking out extra tutoring if it's needed, staying out of trouble. To any student who's watching, I say this: Don't even think about dropping out of school. Don't even think about it.
So today I'm issuing a challenge to educators and lawmakers, parents and teachers alike: Let us all make turning around our schools our collective responsibility as Americans. And that will require new investments in innovative ideas. That's why my budget invests in developing new strategies to make sure at-risk students don't give up on their education, new efforts to give dropouts who want to return to school the help they need to graduate, and new ways to put those young men and women who have left school back on a pathway to graduation.
Now, the fifth part of America's education strategy is providing every American with a quality higher education, whether it's college or technical training. Never has a college degree been more important; never has it been more expensive. And at a time when so many of our families are bearing enormous economic burdens, the rising cost of tuition threatens to shatter dreams. And that's why we will simplify Federal college assistance forms so it doesn't take a Ph.D. to apply for financial aid.
In just a single generation, America has fallen from 2d place to 11th place in the portion of students completing college. That is unfortunate, but it's by no means irreversible. With resolve and the right investments, we can retake the lead once more. And that's why, in my address to the Nation the other week, I called on Americans to commit to at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020. And to meet that goal, we are investing $2.5 billion to identify and support innovative initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students persist and graduate.
So let's not stop at education with college. Let's recognize a 21st century reality: Learning doesn't end in our early twenties. Adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees and new skills, especially in the current economic environment. And that means working with all our universities and schools, including community colleges--a great and undervalued asset--to prepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries and to improve access to job training not only for young people who are just starting their careers, but for older workers who need new skills to change careers. And that's going to be one of the key tasks that Secretary Solis is involved with, is making sure that lifelong learning is a reality and a possibility for more Americans.
It's through initiatives like these that we'll see more Americans earn a college degree or receive advanced training and pursue a successful career. And that's why I'm calling on Congress to work with me to enact these essential reforms and to reauthorize the Workforce Reinvestment Act. That's how we will round out a complete and competitive education in the United States of America.
You know, when you're a kid you don't think about the sacrifices they're making. She had to work; I just had to go to school. But she'd still wake up every day to make sure I was getting what I needed for my education. And it's because she did this day after day, week after week, because of all the other opportunities and breaks that I got along the way, all the sacrifices that my grandmother and my grandfather made along the way, that I can stand here today as President of the United States. It's because of the sacrifices--[applause]. See, I want every child in this country to have the same chance that my mother gave me, that my teachers gave me, that my college professors gave me, that America gave me.
It was heartbreaking that a girl so full of promise was so full of worry that she and her class titled their video, "Is Anybody Listening?" So today there's something I want to say to Yvonne and her class at Village Academy: I am listening; we are listening; America is listening. And we will not rest until your parents can keep your jobs--we will not rest until your parents can keep their jobs and your families can keep their homes, and you can focus on what you should be focusing on, your own education; until you can become the businessmen, doctors, and lawyers of tomorrow, until you can reach out and grasp your dreams for the future.
We've got to put our growth model on a different footing, and that means that we've got to deal with our health care system and reduce costs for families, businesses, and governments. It means that we have to think through our energy policy so that we're not so badly dependent on foreign oil. It means we've got to improve our education system so that our young people are equipped with the skills and knowledge that they're going to need to get jobs in the future.
And on education, how do we build on the reforms that we talked about during the campaign and that are funded, at least temporarily, through the stimulus package. And I gave a major speech on education priorities yesterday.
And so part of what I think every State should be doing right now is figuring out, A, how do we invest in our people so that we're attracting world-class businesses who are looking for world-class employees? I think getting K-12 education right, not short-changing higher education, I think those things are absolutely critical; thinking about where can--where do strategic infrastructure investments make sense. You know, if you think about the Midwest, one of the problems is, is that--this is my stenographer. She just wants to make sure that I'm not tripping over myself.
My goal here is to create laboratories of innovation so that in the public school system, we are on a race to the top as opposed to stuck in the old ways of doing things. And we've got to; we've got to do that. In your home town of Cleveland, I don't know off the top of my head what the dropout rate is, but I've got to assume that it's hovering around 50 percent. If you look at the number of children going through the Cleveland public schools who are actually prepared to go to college, it's probably 1 out of 7 or 8 or 10. And that's just not acceptable. It's not acceptable for them; it's not acceptable in terms of America's economic future. And so we've got to experiment with ways to provide a better educational experience for our kids, and some charters are doing outstanding jobs. So the bottom line is to try to create innovation within the public school system that can potentially be scaled up, but also to make sure that we are maintaining very high standards for any charter school that's created.
Here's what we do, though, we say that on health care, energy, and education, it's time for us to make investments that had been put off for decades and had made us less competitive. And every dime of increased spending that we include in those areas we offset either with additional revenues or with cuts, and we cut a lot of stuff.
And on education, if we're pricing people out of the college market, if nobody wants to teach because teachers don't get paid much, if we're not investing in early childhood education, if we're not investing in science and technology, then we're going to fall behind.
The other message, though, is that there are no shortcuts to long-term economic growth, and we can't just keep on doing the same things that we were doing before and somehow expect that all our problems are going to be solved. We've got to tackle some of these things like health care, energy, and education that have been put off for too long.
Our troops are faced with complex missions. Increasingly, they're called upon to defeat nimble enemies while keeping local populations on their side. And that's why my administration is committed to growing the size of our ground forces, and to investing in the skills that can help our troops succeed in the unconventional mission that they now face. We must understand different languages and different cultures; we must study determined adversaries and developing tactics. That's the education that takes place within the walls of this university, and that is the work that must be done to keep our Nation safe.
Your story is your own and the education that you're receiving will help you advance it. But you're here because you've also accepted the responsibility of having your story as part of the larger American story. Your story is serving your fellow citizens in the wider world. And my message to you today is simple: Your individual service makes all of the difference. You will make the decisions, large and small, that will help shape our future.
But the truth is that these problems in the financial market, as acute and urgent as they are, are only part of what threatens our economy. And we must not use the need to confront them as an excuse to keep ignoring the long-term threats to our prosperity: the cost of our health care and our oil addiction, our education deficit and our fiscal deficit.
That's what we've done in the past, and that's why I've chosen to address education, health care, energy, and this budget, because we can't wait to make the investments today that will lead to tomorrow's prosperity. Now, as members of the Business Roundtable, you know how important this is when it comes to each one of these challenges.
On education, I know that you just heard from Arne Duncan. You've all long understood that the success of your business ultimately depends on its ability to hire workers who have the skills and knowledge to compete with other workers and other companies all over the world. You also know that America is increasingly falling behind in that competition. That's why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education from the day they are born to the day they begin their career.
We've already dramatically expanded early childhood education, and we will continue to improve the quality of these programs. For as this organization knows, children who receive a quality early childhood education are more likely to attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job.
This budget also creates new rewards tied to teacher performance and pathways for advancement and rewards for success for those teachers. And we're going to invest in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. We've urged States to lift the cap on the number of charter schools they build. And I've asked every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the next--by the year 2020.
And to meet that goal, we're investing $2.5 million to identify and support initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students graduate. And we'll also make sure that a higher education is affordable for every American who wants to go.
Now, I know that some have questioned this commitment, and I want you to know that I understand the skepticism, because we've heard promises like this before. And it's true that this crisis has compelled us to add to our deficit in the short term. But I ask all of you to look at this budget. Already, we've identified $2 trillion in deficit reductions over the next decade. We've announced procurement reform that will save the Government $40 billion by greatly reducing no-bid contracts. We're going to end education programs that don't work. We will eliminate direct payments to agribusiness that don't need them. We'll root out even more waste, fraud, and abuse in our Medicare program.
The business community is committed to be a part of the solution. And those millions of jobs that you talked about, you know, largely, as you say, are coming from businesses. And therefore, we want to partner with you in terms of, one, ending this economic crisis, increasing liquidity, and getting smart regulation. And we're with you and Secretary Duncan on the education agenda, workforce development, personnel training, vocational training. We're for affordable and quality health care costs and access to that for everyone.
It is complicated, and it is international. And so our focus right now is to stabilize the financial system, get credit flowing again, to project a budget that allows in future years for us to start tackling these very big problems. But we've got to get started now if we're actually going to get there on health care, on energy, and education. And that's what we're trying to accomplish.
William D. Green. Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you also for your comments on education over the last several days. It gave us a lot of clarity, and Secretary Duncan did a terrific job of--I think it's one thing that we're very much aligned on because we realize that a competitive country needs competitive companies and in order to do that we have to have a competitive workforce.
The first one is about making sure the education system produces the skills that we need for today's and tomorrow's markets. The second thing is we need to institutionalize life-long learning. It's absolutely true, we can see that all now, and it needs to be an individual and a collective imperative for our country. And I think all of our citizens and all of our workforce needs to understand that. And the third is, for a problem that's here and now, is we need to facilitate workers in gaining new skills that have been displaced by economic dislocation and other changes in the market, which are going to be a natural occurrence over time. And we need to work forward on that. So we're just looking forward to working closely with your team to make sure we can tackle those. Thank you.
Not everything is going to be implemented now. And this, by the way, goes to a broader issue with respect to our budget. Because I think there's some people, when we issued the budget, they said, "Boy, these Obama people, they're really ambitious. They're taking on health care; they're taking on energy; they're taking on education. Don't they know that there's this bank crisis right now? We've got to do one thing at a time."
But even with consumers--I mean, we've got this interesting situation where we're actually seeing consumers do exactly what we would have liked them to do, just not all at once, and that's starting to save some, right? Paying down credit card bills, making sure that they've socked away a little bit each month for their retirement, for their kids' college education, that, ultimately, is a positive thing.
The last point that I'd make--and I made this point to the Business Roundtable yesterday--it is very important, even as we're focused on the financial system and the credit markets, that we are laying the foundation for what I'm calling a post-bubble economic growth plan. The days when we are going to be able to grow this economy just on an overheated housing market or people spending--maxing out on their credit cards, those days are over. What we need to do is go back to fundamentals, and that means driving our health care costs down. It means improving our education system so our children are prepared and we're innovating in science and technology. And it means that we're making this transition to the clean energy economy. Those are the priorities reflected in our budget, and that is part and parcel with the short-term steps that we're taking to make sure that the economy gets back on its feet.
I am confident that this crisis is a very delicate one, but at the same time, it is an extraordinary opportunity so that we can prove for those that elected us that we are capable to cope with major issues. Every country has to go back and start investing in infrastructure, in housing projects, in education, in health care.
As he knows, it's no small task. This Department has more than a quarter of a million employees across America, and its services range from providing education and training benefits, health care and home loans, to tending those quiet places that remind us of the great debt we owe and remind me of the heavy responsibility that I bear. It's a commitment that lasts from the day our veterans retire that uniform to the day that they are put to rest and that continues on for their families.
Because we know that the countries who out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, this budget also invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability for our schools, in rewards for teachers who succeed, and an affordable college education for anyone who wants to go. That's the reason the three of us are standing here today. None of us were born with a silver spoon in our mouths, but we got a great education. And if we combine additional resources with a commitment to reform, then I think we can deliver that for every American child.
Now, there are those who say the plans in this budget are too ambitious to enact; to say that--they say that in the face of challenges that we face, we should be trying to do less than more. What I say is that the challenges we face are too large to ignore. The cost of our health care is too high to ignore. The dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is growing too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or another 8 years would be to continue the same irresponsibility that led us to this point. That's not why I ran for this office. I didn't come here to pass on our problems to the next President or the next generation; I came here to solve them.
I am also proud today to announce that I am naming a great friend, Dan Rooney, cofounder of the Ireland Fund, unwavering supporter of Irish peace and culture and education--not to mention the owner of the Super Bowl champion Pittsburgh Steelers--as the United States Ambassador to Ireland. He will be an outstanding representative.
And I've spoken before: We have to move beyond a constant bubble-bust mentality and start establishing a foundation for long-term economic growth. That involves making investments on health care and energy and education. That means increasing our productivity across sectors and not just relying on the financial sector for all our economic growth. It means that shareholders and boards of directors have to hold executives more accountable for their compensation scales.
Because we know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, this budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability in our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anyone who wants it.
The President. Well, I say our challenges are too large to ignore. The cost of health care is too high to ignore. The dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that got us to this point. I didn't run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation or the next President. I ran for President to solve these problems so that you've got a better shot at life.
So I will--and I will also say this, that my obligation is to make sure that we've improved our economy, that we've gotten serious on health care, made significant progress on energy, made education more affordable, and improved the excellence of our educational system K-12, that we have started controlling our deficits.
So what we've tried to do is to say, let's, right now, just focus on getting the economy back on track, reducing unemployment, creating jobs, making sure our school systems still have teachers, cops are still on the streets, firefighters are still in the station house. Let's do what we need to do to get through this difficult time. Let's make some investments in health care, energy, education that will lay the foundation for long-term economic growth. But let's also start making some tough choices about the deficit as soon as we get out of this recovery.
The President. Well, look, we--most of--almost all of the money that's going to States under the Recovery Act for education is designed to retain teachers. Almost--the lion's share of it, I mean, there's some money for school construction as well, and there's some money for innovation, because we can't just put more money into the schools without also reforming the schools and making them better.
One last point I want to make about education. This budget that we are now arguing about--and you're going to be hearing a bunch of arguments about, oh, you know, Obama, he's a spendthrift, et cetera, et cetera--we reduce nondefense discretionary spending as a percentage of gross domestic product, but what we insist on is that we make some investments in education.
And I haven't--and one of the things that we haven't talked about is higher education. I've said we've got to increase student loans, student grants, the Pell grant program. That's got to be a priority. That's our future, and I'm going to fight for it. I don't care how long it takes; we're going to make it more affordable to go to college, because that's what everybody needs.
And that's what my recovery plan does. It will create or save 3.5 million jobs, nearly 400,000 of them right here in California, in part, by making investments in areas critical to our long-term growth. And that is the forward-thinking purpose of the budget that I submitted to Congress. It's a budget that makes hard choices about where to save and where to spend, that makes overdue investments in education, health care, and, yes, in energy--investments that will catalyze innovation and industry, create green jobs, and launch clean, renewable energy companies right here in California.
Already, we're seeing a burst of refinancing. Refinancing applications jumped 30 percent last week to more than double the rate we had last fall, saving the average homeowner hundreds of dollars a month, the equivalent of a generous tax cut. That's money in their pocket, money you can use right now to pay your bills or pay off your debts or save up for a rainy day, to save for retirement or that college education for your child.
We know and we've got three principals right here in the front row--we know that--we know and they know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow. And that's why my budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability for our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anybody who wants it.
Listen, here's what I say. I say our challenges are too big to ignore. The cost of our health care is too high to ignore. Our dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that led us to this point in the first place. And I did not run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation. I ran for President to solve these problems for the next generation and for the next President. So I--that's what you want.
So the only way that we can initiate true health care reform is if we control costs. And one of the most important ways for us to control costs is to deal with the issue of prevention, which means making sure that we have proper nutrition programs in our schools, making sure that we've got effective physical education programs for our children. It means making sure that everybody has access to a primary care doctor and that they are getting regular checkups, that we are avoiding preventable diseases like diabetes that are helping to shoot our medical costs through the roof.
The President. Well, you are exactly right, that we need everybody. And every program that we have has to be thinking on the front end, how do we make sure that it is inclusive and building into it our ability to draw on the capacities of persons with disabilities. That's true on the education front where our recovery package increases funding for children with disabilities. It is true in terms of how Hilda Solis, our Secretary of Labor, will be thinking about our training programs, to make sure that we are not excluding from training for high-tech jobs--the new jobs of the future--persons with disability. It means enforcing the ADA and fighting back on some of--court opinions that have tried to narrow, in ways that I think are inappropriate, the original intent of that legislation.
The President. Well, this is why--before we came on, the Governor and I were talking. And the fact is, is that we are massively ramping up education spending at the Federal level, on a whole variety of fronts. But historically most education funding is done at the State level, at the local level.
So we may be able to take education funding at the Federal level from 7 percent to 9 percent, for example, but the lion's share is still going to be coming locally. And that's why it's so important for everybody to be engaged in the various initiatives that are going to be coming up, to make sure that what you just articulated, the need to invest in our kids, that that is reflected in terms of State budgets.
So the reason I make that point is you can't ask local elected officials to raise teachers' salaries and cut taxes and balance the budget and increase roads. At some point you've got to make some choices. So if you want a high quality education--and California historically had the best education system in the country--then somebody has got to pay for it.
And when it comes to education--and I'm speaking to teachers here and educators--let me say this--I want to do some truth-telling here. Uh-oh. [Laughter] I love teachers. There is no profession that is more important than teaching. My sister is a teacher, but--and I am a huge supporter of the teachers' unions. They were some of my first supporters. But let me tell you, you can't just be talking more money, more money, without also talking about how are we going to reform and make the system better. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money.
Now, before I get off the topic of the education, let me do a little more truth-telling. Parents, you can't complain about the schools and complain about the teachers, but when your child comes home, they're playing video games and not doing homework, and you don't have time to go to your teacher and parent--teacher-parent meeting. Our parents have to instill a sense of excellence and a thirst for knowledge.
And the truth of the matter is, even as overcrowded as schools may be, as poor the computer equipment may be, if you took a bunch of kids right now from China or India and you put them in these classrooms, from their perspective these would be unbelievable schools. I mean, they don't have better facilities, but they're out-performing us in math and science. Why is that? Well, part of it is, is that we as parents are not insisting and demanding on the kind of higher performance from our kids. So everybody has got to be more accountable in order to improve our education system.
The second thing is keep paying attention to the debates that are taking place right now, so when we have a big budget debate--I want everybody who was paying so much attention during the election to be as interested--what's going on in terms of education spending, what's going on in terms of higher health care spending, are the investments we're planning to make on energy, are they right ones? Because, again, we're going to have some tough choices to make.
The last point I want to make--I expect that over the next couple of weeks, maybe even next week, we are going to be in a position to sign a national service bill coming from the House and the Senate, and as part of this, what we're going to be doing is expanding programs like the Peace Corps and Teach For America and other mechanisms, other avenues where you can make a decision as a young person to teach for 3 years or to serve in the Peace Corps or to serve in the Foreign Service or volunteer in some fashion in your communities and help finance your education in the process. And I think there are young people all across California, all across America, who are interested in that opportunity, and I want to give that opportunity to you.
The President. Yes. She looks very nice. [Laughter] Well, let me--as I said before, Ethan, we're going to do everything we can to protect our teachers. We already passed a law in Washington that's going to give more money to the State to help keep teachers in their jobs. And one of the things that we didn't talk about earlier, we're also going to be putting more money into school construction, because there are a lot of overcrowded schools and overcrowded classrooms that don't--aren't wired for the Internet effectively. And we are going to make sure that we invest in that as well, because I want you to get a first-class education.
The President. Everybody's got an opinion. But that's part of what makes for our democracy. You know, it's contentious, and people are hitting back. And I do think, though, that the American people are all in a place where they understand it took us a while to get into this mess, it's going to take a while for us to get out of it. And if they have confidence that I'm making steps to deal with issues like health care and energy and education, that matter deeply to their daily lives, then I think they're going to give us some time.
But I actually have confidence that we'll get that done. In the meantime, we're taking a lot of steps to, for example, opening up--open up separate credit lines outside of banks for small businesses so that they can get credit, because there are a lot of small businesses out here who are just barely hanging on. Their credit lines are starting to be cut. We're trying to set up a securitized market for student loans and auto loans outside of the banking system. So there are other ways of getting credit flowing again. But that's why we've got to solve the banking problem, and we've got to solve issues like health care, energy, and education that will put us on a pathway for long-term economic growth.
You know, over the last 2 years during the course of this campaign, one of the things that I saw was how dedicated each and every one of you are to making sure that your States and your constituencies are well served by State government. And part of my job as President is to ensure that we're a good partner with you, because you're where rubber hits the road; you're where people actually see the benefits of a good education and high-quality health care, transportation, energy plans that actually make sense.
What we will not cut are investments that will lead to real growth and prosperity over the long term. That's why our budget makes a historic commitment to comprehensive health care reform. That's why it enhances America's competitiveness by reducing our dependence on foreign oil and building on a clean energy economy. And that's why it makes a downpayment on a complete and competitive education for every child in America from the cradle up through the time that they get a career. In short, our budget will strengthen each of our 50 States for generations to come.
With the magnitude of the challenges we face, I don't just view this budget as numbers on a page or a laundry list of programs. It's an economic blueprint for our future, a vision of America where growth is not based on real estate bubbles or overleveraged banks, but on a firm foundation of investments in energy, education, and health care that will lead to a real and lasting prosperity.
These investments are not a wish list of priorities that I picked out of thin air, they are a central part of a comprehensive strategy to grow this economy by attacking the very problems that have dragged it down for too long: the high cost of health care and our dependence on foreign oil; our education deficit and our fiscal deficit.
Second, this budget must renew our Nation's commitment to a complete and competitive education for every American child. In this global economy, we know the countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, and we know that our students are already falling behind their counterparts in places like China. That is why we have proposed investments in childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability for our schools, in rewards for teachers who succeed, and in affordable college education for anyone who wants to go. It is time to demand excellence from our schools so that we can finally prepare our workforce for a 21st century economy.
Through this plan, we have achieved more in 2 months in support of a new, clean energy economy than we've achieved in perhaps 30 years. And the budget I've proposed builds on this foundation. The budget is a comprehensive strategy to grow this economy. We will attack the problems that have held us back for too long: the high cost of health care, the budget deficit, our broken education system, and our energy dependence.
Pilot Dominic "Tony" Antonelli. That's--you got it just right. The--one of the beautiful things about getting to work here is you can study just about anything that you're really interested in--science and math being a big part of it. But we have medical doctors, geologists, engineers, and physicists in the group here with us. So it's pretty much anything in the math and science field. We've got a couple of schoolteachers here with us so--studying education as well as the math and science.
President Obama. Well, as Prime Minister Rudd indicated, there's a global crisis, and what we've seen is a pattern that's been building up. In this case, subprime lending was the initial trigger, but there's a larger problem, and that is huge unregulated capital flows, a reliance on bubbles as a driver of economic growth. And what we have said is that it is very important us--for us to return to a much more stable approach to economic growth. One that's built on improved education, making sure that we are developing the new clean energies of the future, having a regulatory system in place that protects consumers--in the case of housing, for example, here in the United States, you saw people being peddled loans that they could never hope to pay back--but also protects the system by ensuring that you're not leveraging off of one shaky loan huge numbers of other financial products that ultimately prove to be worthless.
What I've said here in Washington is that we've got to make some tough choices; we got to make some tough budgetary choices. What we can't do, though, is sacrifice long-term growth, investments that are critical to the future. And that's why my budget focuses on health care, energy, education, the kinds of things that can build a foundation for long-term economic growth, as opposed to the fleeting prosperity that we've seen over the last several years.
The President. Well, I've emphasized repeatedly what I expect out of this budget. I expect that there's serious efforts at health care reform and that we are driving down costs for families and businesses and, ultimately, for the Federal and State governments that are going to be broke if we continue on the current path. I've said that we've got to have a serious energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy. We've got to invest in education, K-12 and beyond, to upgrade the skills of the American worker so we can compete in the international economy. And I've said that we've got to start driving our deficit numbers down.
The President. No, I--what I said was I haven't seen yet what provisions are in there. The bottom line is, is that I want to see health care, energy, education, and serious efforts to reduce our deficit--our budget deficit. And there are going to be a lot of details that are still being worked out, but I have confidence that we're going to be able to get a budget done that's reflective of what needs to happen in order to make sure that America grows.
Now, none of us know exactly what's going to happen 6 or 8 or 10 years from now. Here's what I do know: If we don't tackle energy, if we don't improve our education system, if we don't drive down the costs of health care, if we're not making serious investments in science and technology and our infrastructure, then we won't grow 2.6 percent, we won't grow 2.2 percent. We won't grow.
And so, what we're trying to emphasize is, let's make sure that we're making the investments that we need to grow, to meet those growth targets. At the same time, we're still reducing the deficit by a couple of trillion dollars; we are cutting out wasteful spending in areas like Medicare; we're changing procurement practices when it comes to the Pentagon budget; we are looking at social service programs and education programs that don't work and eliminate them. And we will continue to go line by line through this budget, and where we find programs that don't work we will eliminate them.
But I'm--look, I'm not going to lie to you, it is tough. As I said, that's why the critics tend to criticize, but they don't offer an alternative budget. Because even if we were not doing health care, we were not doing energy, we were not doing education, they'd still have a whole bunch of problems in those out-years, according to CBO projections. The only difference is that we will not have invested in what's necessary to make this economy grow.
We measure our recovery by how many small businesses can keep their doors open, and how many families can afford the promise of a college education. And that's why the third step that we took was to restart the flow of credit to families and businesses by generating car loans and student loans and small-business loans. It's a program that Secretary Geithner worked with the Federal Reserve to design, and it has already generated more lending in the last week than we saw in the previous 4 months combined.
Because we know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, we're going to invest in childhood education, in high standards and accountability for our schools. We're going to reward teachers for success, and we're going to invest in affordable college educations for anybody who wants to go. It's time to demand excellence from our schools so we can finally prepare our workforce for a 21st century economy and inspire our children to come out of school saying they want to be scientists and engineers and doctors and teachers.
Now, there are those who will tell you that all this is too much, that the plans in this budget are just too ambitious to enact; we should only focus, they'll tell you, on one problem at a time. But we know that the challenges we face are too large to ignore. The cost of our health care is too high to ignore. Our dependence on foreign oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is growing too wide to ignore.
We know that the countries that out-educate us are going to outcompete us tomorrow. And that's why we invested in early childhood education, and high standards for our schools, and rewards for teachers who are successful, and college educations for anybody who wants to go. We've got to demand excellence for our schools, to finally prepare our workforce for the 21st century economy. We want our children to be scientists and engineers and doctors and teachers.
The President. She cannot wait. I'm not going to wait until we've got another $4-a-gallon gasoline before suddenly everybody says, "Why don't we have an energy policy?" We can't wait. I'm not going to wait until suddenly we find out that our children can't compete for the jobs of the future. That's why we're going to fix education now not later. We can't wait.
That success will require preparing every child, everywhere in this country, to outcompete any worker anywhere in the world because we know that those students who are getting the best education are going to be able to compete. And that's why we're making a historic investment in early childhood education. And that's why we're going to make a historic investment in improving K-12 education, making sure that our children get a complete and competitive education from the cradle up through a career. It's an investment that will expand and improve not just early learning programs, but reward good teachers while replacing bad ones and put college or technical training within reach for anyone who wants it.
Jared Bernstein. Thank you, Mr. President. Our first question comes from Boston, Massachusetts, on the topic of education: "The Founding Fathers believed that there is no difference between a free society and an educated society. Our educational system, however, is woefully inadequate. How do you plan to restore education as a right and core cultural value in America?"
The President. Well, it's a great question, and--let me see if this mike works so that I'm not stuck at this podium. I'm here only because of the education I received. I wasn't born into wealth, I wasn't born into fame, but I had parents who cared about education and grandparents who cared about education, and I was lucky enough, through scholarships and sacrifice on the part of my family, to get the best education that America has to offer.
Too many of our children aren't getting that kind of education. It's not because their parents don't believe in the value of education; it's not because these young people are less talented. It's because of two reasons: One, in many cases, our schools are underresourced. There aren't enough teachers; the teachers aren't getting enough of the training they need for the classroom; there's a shortage of supplies. Some of the schools that I visited during the course of traveling around the country just shocked the conscience. There are schools that I've seen that were built in the 1850s that are still being used but haven't been upgraded the way they need to.
So a lot of times in Washington we get an argument about money versus reform. And the key thing to understand about our education system is we need more resources and we need reform. If we just put more money into a system that's designed for the 19th century and we're in the 21st, we're not going to get the educational outcomes we need. On the other hand, if we talk a lot about reform but we're not willing to put more resources in, that's not going to work.
So let me give you just a couple examples of what we need to do. Early childhood education we know works; let's invest in that. That's what my budget calls for: substantial investment; every dollar we invest in early childhood education, we get potentially $10 back in improved reading scores, reduced dropout rates, reduced delinquency rates, and so forth.
Number two, let's focus on the most important ingredient in the school, and that's the teacher. Let's pay our teachers more money. Let's give them more support. Let's give them more training. Let's make sure that schools of education that are training our teachers are up to date with the best methods to teach our kids. And let's work with teachers so that we are providing them measures of whether they're effective or not, and let's hold them accountable for being effective.
If we do early childhood education, if we focus on teacher training, if we invest in math and science education, which is vital--and we're falling behind other countries on that front--then I actually feel pretty confident that we can outcompete any country in the world. But it's going to take more money, and it's going to take more reform, and it's going to take, by the way, openness to innovation on things like charter schools or performance pay. There are a whole range of things that may work, in some cases may not work, but we've got to try some new things, because right now too many of our kids are stuck, and we can't afford to lose them.
There is a long-term issue, though, that we have to deal with--and this was true even before the current crisis--and that is that so much of our economic activity was in the financial services sector. It was related to an overheated housing market. It was dependent on huge amounts of consumer saving. And we were seeing those steady declines in manufacturing. We were seeing steady declines in a lot of other productive sectors of the economy. And one of the things that my budget is designed to do is, by fixing our education system, by reducing costs of health care, by going after the clean energy jobs of the future, trying to put our economy on a more solid footing.
So when people--when you hear this budget debate that's taking place right now, and folks say, "Oh, you know, his--President Obama's budget, he's increasing money for veterans and he's increasing money for education, and he's doing all these things that--that's going to bust the budget," what they don't understand is, is that if you add up the recovery package that we've already passed and you add up the various proposals I have to grow the economy through clean energy and all that stuff that we're doing, that amounts to a fraction of the long-term deficit and debt that we're facing. The lion's share of it has to do with Medicare and Medicaid and the huge, rising cost of health care. So our attitude is, better to pay now and make an investment in improving the health care system rather than waiting and finding ourselves in a situation where we can't fix it.
And so what we said during the campaign was, let's set up a situation where every young person who is so inspired can take advantage of service, and in exchange they will help be able to finance their educations. And I'm confident that we're about to get legislation passed. And once that legislation is passed, I think that before the end of the year, potentially, we can get something implemented on that front.
And one of the things that we want to do is on the Pell grant program, for example. We want to increase the amount of the Pell grant so that it catches up with inflation, and we want to--we want more young people to be eligible for the Pell grant program. And that's particularly important because anybody who's financed their educations understands that grants are a lot better than loans. And when I was going to college, about--and this was typical for, I think, college students--the average student who needed financial assistance, about 70 percent of it came in grants and about 30 percent of it came in loans. Today, it's reversed: 30 percent come in grants; 70 percent come in loans. And so students are loaded up with $20,000, $30,000, $40,000 worth of debt. And this is just for their undergraduate education; that doesn't even start counting their higher ed.
I just want to remind you that the money that we are spending on education, on health care, and on energy, if you added up all that increased money that we're spending, it still is not what's driving our long-term deficits. What's driving it is Medicare, Medicaid, a structural gap that we have because of the Bush tax cuts over the last several years that left us spending a lot more than we were saving.
Now, somebody could make the same argument to you that folks are making to us with respect to the budget, which is, you can't afford to be sending your kids to college right now. That's fiscally irresponsible. You're taking out debt for your kids to get an education. It's better for you to just put them to work right now at Mickey--at a fast food place, and they'll be bringing in a little bit of income. And maybe later they can go to college.
The President. Oh, absolutely. Well, as I said, the teachers are the most important person in the education system. So if we don't have teacher buy-in, if they're not enthusiastic about the reforms that we're initiating, then, ultimately, they're not going to work. So we've got to have teacher participation in developing these approaches.
Can you tell us, are you still pushing a middle-class tax cut? I know you said you want the Congress to follow the principles you set out -- your priorities, education --
SCHIEFFER: -- reducing the deficit, health care, and so on -- and education, but have you abandoned the middle-class tax cut?
And so I would ask people to be confident about their own futures. And that may mean, in some cases, spending now as investments for the future. There's been a debate back home about our budget. In the midst of this crisis, should we deal with health care? Should we deal with energy? Should we deal with education? And one of the analogies I've used is a family who is having a difficult time--and I actually get letters like this occasionally from voters--one of our parents has lost their job, savings have declined, and so I'm wrestling with whether or not I should go to college, because that will require me taking out a lot of debt, and maybe it would be more responsible for me to go find any job that I can to help the family.
Well, indeed, so we are convinced that we'll continue successfully our contacts, in particular today, where we were not only discussing international issues or bilateral items of interaction; we were also discussing education, which probably not everybody--where we have come to an understanding that we're reading the same textbooks while in these subjects. And this will set us further for interaction.
But in an era of integration and interdependence, it is also my responsibility to lead America into recognizing that its interests, its fate is tied up with the larger world; that if we neglect or abandon those who are suffering in poverty, that not only are we depriving ourselves of potential opportunities for markets and economic growth, but, ultimately, that despair may turn to violence that turns on us; that unless we are concerned about the education of all children and not just our children, not only may we be depriving ourselves of the next great scientist who's going to find the next new energy source that saves the planet, but we also may make people around the world much more vulnerable to anti-American propaganda.
Strasbourg has been known throughout history as a city at the crossroads. Over thousands of years, you straddled many kingdoms and many cultures. Two rivers are joined here. Two religions have flourished in your churches. Three languages comprise an ancient oath that bears the city's name. You've served as a center of industry and commerce, a seat of government and education, where Goethe studied and Pasteur taught and Gutenberg imagined his printing press.
And so my question concerns the many children all over the world that live in poverty, under human rights violations. They have hunger; they have no education and other problems. So what is your strategy, Mr. President, to solve this problem?
Over the long term, though, we've got to have a strategy that recognizes that the interest of the developed world in feeding the hungry, in educating children, that that's not just charity; it's in our interests. There's not a direct correlation between poverty and violence and conflict and terrorism. But I can tell you that if children have no education whatsoever, if young men are standing idle each and every day and feel completely detached and completely removed from the modern world, they are more likely--they are more susceptible to ideologies that appeal to violence and destruction.
Now, I just want to remind people, though, why our troops are fighting, because I think the notion that you laid out, Major, was that our troops might be less motivated. Our troops are highly motivated to protect the United States, just as troops from NATO are highly motivated to protect their own individual countries and NATO allies collectively. So we want to do everything we can to encourage and promote rule of law, human rights, the education of women and girls in Afghanistan, economic development, infrastructure development, but I also want people to understand that the first reason we are there is to root out Al Qaida so that they cannot attack members of the alliance.
Make no mistake, though: Iraq, Turkey, and the United States face a common threat from terrorism. That includes the Al Qaida terrorists who have sought to drive Iraqis apart and destroy their country. That includes the PKK. There is no excuse for terror against any nation. As President and as a NATO ally, I pledge that you will have our support against the terrorist activities of the PKK or anyone else. Now, these efforts will be strengthened by the continued work to build ties of cooperation between Turkey, the Iraqi Government, and Iraq's Kurdish leaders, and by your continued efforts to promote education and opportunity and democracy for the Kurdish population here inside Turkey.
Above all--above all we will demonstrate through actions our commitment to a better future. I want to help more children get the education that they need to succeed. We want to promote health care in places where people are vulnerable. We want to expand the trade and investment that can bring prosperity for all people. In the months ahead, I will present specific programs to advance these goals. Our focus will be on what we can do, in partnership with people across the Muslim world, to advance our common hopes and our common dreams. And when people look back on this time, let it be said of America that we extended the hand of friendship to all people.
Turkey and the United States have a long history of partnership and cooperation. Exchanges between our two peoples go back over 150 years. We've been NATO allies for more than five decades. We have deep ties in trade and education, in science and research. And America is proud to have many men and women of Turkish origin who have made our country a more dynamic and a more successful place. So Turkish-American relations rest on a strong foundation.
So I came here to renew that foundation and to build on it. I enjoyed visiting your Parliament. I've had productive discussions with your President and your Prime Minister. But I also always like to take some time to talk to people directly, especially young people. So in the next few minutes, I want to focus on three areas in which I think we can make some progress: advancing dialog between our two countries, but also advancing dialog between the United States and the Muslim world; extending opportunity in education and in social welfare; and then also reaching out to young people as our best hope for peaceful, prosperous futures in both Turkey and in the United States. Now, let me just talk briefly about those three points.
But there's also a larger issue of how Turkey and America can help those who've been left behind in this new global economy. All of our countries have poverty within it. All of it--all of our countries have young people who aren't obtaining the opportunities that they need to get the education that they need. And that's not just true here in Turkey or in the United States, but that's true around the world. And so we should be working together to figure out how we can help people live out their dreams.
Here there's great potential for the United States to work with Muslims around the world on behalf of a more prosperous future. And I want to pursue a new partnership on behalf of basic priorities: What can we do to help more children get a good education? What can we do to expand health care to regions that are on the margins of global society? What steps can we take in terms of trade and investment to create new jobs and industries and ultimately advance prosperity for all of us? To me, these are the true tests of whether we are leaving a world that is better and more hopeful than the one we found.
And as I said in my opening remarks, I think the most important thing to start with is dialog. When you have a chance to meet people from other cultures and other countries and you listen to them, and you find out that, even though you may speak a different language or you may have a different religious faith, it turns out that you care about your family, you have your same hopes about being able to have a career that is useful to the society, you hope that you can raise a family of your own and that your children will be healthy and have a good education; that all those things that human beings all around the world share are more important than the things that are different.
So, yes, I think that it is just and right for the United States and NATO allies and other allies from around the world to do what we can to eliminate the threat of Al Qaida. Now, I think it's important that we don't just do that militarily. I think it's important that we provide educational opportunities for young people in Pakistan and Afghanistan so that they see a different path. And so my policies will be somewhat different, but I don't make any apologies for continuing the effort to prevent bombs going off or planes going into buildings that would kill innocents. I don't think any society can justify that.
You know, in terms of my election, I think that what people felt good about was it affirmed the sense that America is still a land of opportunity. I was not born into wealth. I wasn't born into fame. I come from a racial minority. My name is very unusual for the United States. And so I think people saw my election as proof, as testimony, that although we are imperfect, our society has continued to improve; that racial discrimination has been reduced; that educational opportunity for all people is something that is still available. And I also think that people were encouraged that somebody like me who has a background of living overseas, who has Muslims in his family, who--you know, that I might be able to help to build bridges with other parts of the world.
Finally, this budget recognizes that our veterans deserve something more, an equal chance to reach for the very dream they defend. It's the chance America gave to my grandfather, who enlisted after Pearl Harbor and went on to march in Patton's army. When he came home, he went to college on the GI bill, which made it possible for him and so many veterans like him to live out their own version of the American Dream. And now it's our turn to help guarantee this generation the same opportunity that the greatest generation enjoyed by providing every returning servicemember with a real chance to afford a college education. And by providing the resources to effectively implement the post-9/11 GI bill, that is what this budget does.
And even as we care for veterans who've served this country, Bob Gates has helped us design a budget that does more for our soldiers, more for their families, and more for our military. It fully protects and properly funds the increase to our Army and Marine force strength and halts reductions in the Air Force and Navy, allowing fewer deployments and more time between each. It builds on care for our wounded warriors and our investments in medical research and development. It deepens our commitment to improve the quality of life for military families--military childcare, spousal support, and education--because they're deployed when their loved one gets deployed.
Now, this is when the crisis spread from Wall Street to Main Street. After all, the ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to, as you all well very--know very well, a college education. It's how stores stock their shelves and farms buy equipment and businesses make payroll. So when banks stopped lending money, businesses started laying off workers. When laid-off workers had less money to spend, businesses were forced to lay off even more workers. When people couldn't get a car loan, a bad situation at the auto companies became even worse. When people couldn't get home loans, the crisis in the housing market only deepened. Because the infected securities were being traded worldwide and other nations also had weak regulations, this recession soon became global. And when other nations can't afford to buy our goods, it slows our economy even further.
For even as too many were out there chasing ever-bigger bonuses and short-term profits over the last decade, we continued to neglect the long-term threats to our prosperity: the crushing burden that the rising cost of health care is placing on families and businesses; the failure of our education system to prepare our workers for a new age; the progress that other nations are making on clean energy industries and technologies while we remain addicted to foreign oil; the growing debt that we're passing on to our children. Even after we emerge from the current recession, these challenges will still represent major obstacles that stand in the way of our success in the 21st century. So we've got a lot of work to do.
It's a foundation built upon five pillars that will grow our economy and make this new century another American century: number one, new rules for Wall Street that will reward drive and innovation, not reckless risk-taking; number two, new investments in education that will make our workforce more skilled and competitive; number three, new investments in renewable energy and technology that will create new jobs and new industries; number four, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses; and number five, new savings in our Federal budget that will bring down the debt for future generations. That's the new foundation we must build. That's our house built upon a rock. That must be our future, and my administration's policies are designed to achieve that future.
The second pillar of this new foundation is an education system that finally prepares our workers for a 21st century economy. You know, in the 20th century, the GI bill helped send a generation to college. For decades, we led the world in educational attainment, and as a consequence, we led the world in economic growth. But in this new economy, we've come to trail the world's leaders in graduation rates, in educational achievement, in the production of scientists and engineers. That's why we have set a goal that will greatly enhance our ability to compete for the high-wage, high-tech jobs of the 21st century. By 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. That is the goal that we have set, and we intend to meet it.
Now, to meet that goal, we have to start early. So we've already dramatically expanded early childhood education. We are investing in innovative programs that have proven to help schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. We're creating new rewards that tie teachers' performance and new pathways for advancement. And I've asked every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training, and we have provided tax credits to make a college education more affordable for every American, even those who attend Georgetown.
Already we've identified $2 trillion dollars in deficit reductions over the next decade. We need to do more, but we've already done that. We've announced procurement reform that will greatly reduce no-bid contracts and save the Government $40 billion. We need to do more, but that's an important start. Secretary Gates recently announced a courageous set of reforms that go right at the hundreds of billions of dollars in waste and cost overruns that have bloated our defense budget without making America safer. We need to do more, but that proposal by Secretary Gates is right on target. We will end education programs that don't work. We will root out waste and fraud and abuse in our Medicare program.
Second, in tackling the deficit issue, we simply cannot sacrifice the long-term investments that we so desperately need to generate long-term prosperity. That's the argument that some critics have made: "Well, you're proposing health care reform, you shouldn't be doing that; you're proposing education investments, you shouldn't be doing that. That adds to the deficit."
Across America, families like the people who join me have had tough choices forced upon them because of this economic downturn. Many have lost a job; many are fighting to keep their business open. Many more are struggling to make payments, to stay in their home, or to pursue a college education. And these Americans are the backbone of our economy, the backbone of our middle class. They're the workers, the innovators, the students who are going to be powering our recovery. So their dreams have to be our own. They need a government that is working to create jobs and opportunity for them, rather than simply giving more and more to those at the very top in the false hope that wealth automatically trickles down.
Third, we are helping Americans get the education they need to succeed in a global economy. For years we've seen the price of tuition skyrocket at the same time that it became more and more important to earn a college degree. And that's why we are making college more affordable for every American that needs a hand. That is why we are committed to simplifying the student loan process so more families can get the help they need. And that's also why our $2,500 tax credit for all 4 years of college will help us reach a goal that will help our country lead in the 21st century: By 2020, Americans once again will have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
And let me add that I recognize that the problem will not simply be solved by law enforcement if we're not also dealing with our responsibilities in the United States. And that's why we will take aggressive action to reduce our demand for drugs and to stop the flow of guns and bulk cash south across our borders. And that's why I'm making it a priority to ratify the Illicit Trafficking in Firearms Convention as another tool that we can use to prevent this from happening. And I also am mindful of the statement that's been made earlier, that unless we provide opportunity for an education and for jobs and a career for the young people in the region, then too many will end up being attracted to the drug trade. And so we cannot separate out dealing with the drug issue on the interdiction side and the law enforcement side from the need for critical development in our communities.
And in the next few weeks, we expect to cut at least 100 current programs in the Federal budget so that we can free up those dollars in order to put them to use for critical areas like health care, education, energy, our foreign policy apparatus, which is so important.
Programs like these are a force multiplier; they leverage small numbers of members into thousands of volunteers. And we will focus their service toward solving today's most pressing challenges: clean energy, energy efficiency, health care, education, economic opportunity, veterans, and military families.
Because we must prepare our young Americans to grow into active citizens, this bill makes new investments in service learning. And we've increased the AmeriCorps education award and linked it to Pell grant award levels, another step toward our goal of ensuring that every American receives an affordable college education. Because millions of Americans are out of school and out of work, it creates an energy corps that will help people find useful work and gain skills in a growing industry of the future. Because our boomers are the most highly educated generation in history and our seniors live longer and more active lives than ever before, this bill offers new pathways to harness their talent and experience to serve others. And because this historic expansion of the Corporation for National and Community Service requires someone with both bold vision and responsible management experience, I have chosen Mary [Maria]* Eitel--where's Mary? There she is, stand up, Mary--as its new CEO. The founder and first president of the Nike Foundation, Maria is a smart and innovative thinker, and a leader who shares my belief in the power of service. And I also wanted to thank the Acting CEO, Nicky Goren--where's Nicky?--for guiding the corporation through this transition.
We gather today to mourn the loss of so many lives and celebrate those who saved them, honor those who survived and contemplate the obligations of the living. It is the grimmest of ironies that one of the most savage, barbaric acts of evil in history began in one of the most modernized societies of its time, where so many markers of human progress became tools of human depravity: science that can heal used to kill; education that can enlighten used to rationalize away basic moral impulses; the bureaucracy that sustains modern life used as the machinery of mass death, a ruthless, chillingly efficient system where many were responsible for the killing, but few got actual blood on their hands.
There are few things as fundamental to the American Dream or as essential for America's success as a good education. This has never been more true than it is today. At a time when our children are competing with kids in China and India, the best job qualification you can have is a college degree or advanced training. If you do have that kind of education, then you're well prepared for the future, because half of the fastest growing jobs in America require a Bachelor's degree or more. And if you don't have a college degree, you're more than twice as likely to be unemployed as somebody who does. So the stakes could not be higher for young people like Stephanie.
And yet, in a paradox of American life, at the very moment it's never been more important to have a quality higher education, the cost of that kind of education has never been higher. Over the past few decades, the cost of tuition at private colleges has more than doubled, while costs at public institutions have nearly tripled. Compounding the problem, tuition has grown ten times faster than a typical family's income, putting new pressure on families that are already strained and pricing far too many students out of college altogether. Yet we have a student loan system where we're giving lenders billions of dollars in wasteful subsidies that could be used to make college more affordable for all Americans.
This trend, a trend where a quality higher education slips out of reach for ordinary Americans, threatens the dream of opportunity that America's promised to all its citizens. It threatens to widen the gap between the haves and the have-nots. And it threatens to undercut America's competitiveness, because America cannot lead in the 21st century unless we have the best educated, most competitive workforce in the world. And that's the kind of workforce--and the kind of citizenry--to which we should be committed.
And that's why we have taken and proposed a number of sweeping steps over our first few months in office, steps that amount to the most significant efforts to open the doors of college to middleclass Americans since the GI bill. Millions of working families are now eligible for a $2,500 annual tax credit that will help them pay the cost of tuition, a tax credit that will cover the full cost of tuition at most of the 2-year community colleges that are some of the great and undervalued assets of our education system.
Now just as we've opened the doors of college to every American, we also have to ensure that more students can walk through them. And that's why I've challenged every American to commit to at least 1 year of higher education or advanced training, because by the end of the next decade, I want to see America have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We used to have that; we no longer do. We are going to get that lead back.
Good morning. Over the last 3 months, my administration has taken aggressive action to confront a historic economic crisis. As we do everything that we can to create jobs and get our economy moving, we're also building a new foundation for lasting prosperity, a foundation that invests in quality education, lowers health care costs, and develops new sources of energy powered by new jobs and industries.
We know that our country is better than this. A half century ago, this Nation made a commitment to lead the world in scientific and technological innovation; to invest in education, in research, in engineering; to set a goal of reaching space and engaging every citizen in that historic mission. That was the high water mark of America's investment in research and development. And since then our investments have steadily declined as a share of our national income. As a result, other countries are now beginning to pull ahead in the pursuit of this generation's great discoveries.
Now, I believe it is not in our character, the American character, to follow; it's our character to lead. And it is time for us to lead once again. So I am here today to set this goal: We will devote more than 3 percent of our GDP to research and development. We will not just meet, but we will exceed the level achieved at the height of the space race, through policies that invest in basic and applied research, create new incentives for private innovation, promote breakthroughs in energy and medicine, and improve education in math and science.
President Eisenhower signed legislation to create NASA and to invest in science and math education, from grade school to graduate school. And just a few years later, a month after his address to the 1961 annual meeting of the National Academy of Sciences, President Kennedy boldly declared before a joint session of Congress that the United States would send a man to the Moon and return him safely to the Earth.
The scientific community rallied behind this goal and set about achieving it. And it would not only lead to those first steps on the Moon, it would lead to giant leaps in our understanding here at home. That Apollo program produced technologies that have improved kidney dialysis and water purification systems, sensors to test for hazardous gasses, energy-saving building materials, fire-resistant fabrics used by firefighters and soldiers. More broadly, the enormous investment in that era--in science and technology, in education and research funding--produced a great outpouring of curiosity and creativity, the benefits of which have been incalculable. There are those of you in this audience who became scientists because of that commitment. We have to replicate that.
Fifth, since we know that the progress and prosperity of future generations will depend on what we do now to educate the next generation, today I'm announcing a renewed commitment to education in mathematics and science. This is something I care deeply about. Through this commitment, American students will move from the middle of the top--from the middle to the top of the pack in science and math over the next decade, for we know that the nation that out-educates us today will outcompete us tomorrow. And I don't intend to have us out-educated.
We can't start soon enough. We know that the quality of math and science teachers is the most influential single factor in determining whether a student will succeed or fail in these subjects. Yet in high school more than 20 percent of students in math and more than 60 percent of students in chemistry and physics are taught by teachers without expertise in these fields. And this problem is only going to get worse. There is a projected shortfall of more than 280,000 math and science teachers across the country by 2015. And that's why I'm announcing today that States making strong commitments and progress in math and science education will be eligible to compete later this fall for additional funds under the Secretary of Education's $5 billion Race to the Top program.
There are States, for example, doing innovative work. I'm pleased to announce that Governor Ed Rendell of Pennsylvania will lead an effort with the National Governors Association to increase the number of States that are making science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education a top priority. Six States are currently participating in the initiative, including Pennsylvania, which has launched an effective program to ensure that the State has the skilled workforce in place to draw the jobs of the 21st century. And I want every State, all 50 States, to participate.
But as you know, our work does not end with a high school diploma. For decades, we led the world in educational attainment, and as a consequence we led the world in economic growth. The GI bill, for example, helps send a generation to college. But in this new economy, we've come to trail other nations in graduation rates, in educational achievement, and in the production of scientists and engineers.
That's why my administration has set a goal that will greatly enhance our ability to compete for the high-wage, high-tech jobs of the future, and to foster the next generation of scientists and engineers. In the next decade, by 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. That is a goal that we are going to set. And we've provided tax credits and grants to make a college education more affordable.
It will support an educational campaign to capture the imagination of young people who can help us meet the energy challenge, and will create research opportunities for undergraduates and educational opportunities for women and minorities who too often have been underrepresented in scientific and technological fields, but are no less capable of inventing the solutions that will help us grow our economy and save our planet.
And that's why as President I'm committed to doing everything I can to support the work of teachers. That's why we're working to create better standards and assessments that teachers can use in their classroom. That's why we're promoting innovation in teaching and learning, making critical investments in early childhood education, and helping more Americans walk through the door of higher education.
But Tony never lost sight of his dream, attending college while he worked, becoming the first in his family to get a degree, and going on to get a master's degree in education.
As I told Senator Specter yesterday, he has my full support, my full commitment to work with him on those areas where we do agree, areas like health care, education, expanding America's manufacturing base, and medical research. I look forward to working with the Senator on these and other issues in the coming weeks and months. I'm eager to receive his counsel and advice, especially when he disagrees. And I have great respect and admiration for the decision that he has made.
Now, we've got a lot of work to do, because on our first day in office we found challenges of unprecedented size and scope. Our economy was in the midst of the most serious downturn since the Great Depression. Banks had stopped lending. The housing market was crippled. The deficit was at $1.3 trillion. And meanwhile, families continued to struggle with health care costs, too many of our kids couldn't get the education they needed, the Nation remained trapped by our dangerous dependence on foreign oil.
So that's why I introduced a budget and other measures that build on the Recovery Act to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that's built on five pillars that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century: number one, new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training; number two, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries; number three, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses; number four, new savings that will bring down our deficit; and number five, new rules for Wall Street that reward drive and innovation.
We can't rest until we have schools that prepare our children for the challenges of the 21st century. And we've already made historic investments in education and college affordability. I was talking to your superintendent about all the wonderful things that she's going to be able to do with some of the money that came out of the recovery package. We're going to continue to help our schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. And we're going to reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement. And we will seek the goal of once again--[applause]. We are going to seek the goal of once again having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world--we're going to do it by 2020.
Just a couple more comments on education generally. A lot of schools still aren't using technology as well as they could in the classroom. And one of the things we're trying to do with the Recovery Act is to help schools get broadband, get computers, but then also train people to use it properly. I think we can do more with technology. Once kids get out of high school, making college affordable is absolutely critical. We have to redesign the college experience so that, not everybody is going to go to school for 4 years right in a row when they're 18. Some people are going to work for 2 years, then go back to school for 2 years once they figure out something they're interested in, go back to work, maybe 5 years down the road, they need to retrain.
We have to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century. And that's exactly what this budget begins to do. It contains new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses, and new savings that will bring down our deficit.
The President. All right. Okay. [Laughter] Surprised--I am surprised compared to where I started, when we first announced for this race, by the number of critical issues that appear to be coming to a head all at the same time. You know, when I first started this race, Iraq was a central issue, but the economy appeared on the surface to still be relatively strong. There were underlying problems that I was seeing with health care for families and our education system and college affordability and so forth, but, obviously, I didn't anticipate the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
This metaphor has been used before, but the ship of state is an ocean liner, it's not a speed boat. And so the way we are constantly thinking about this issue of how to bring about the changes that the American people need is to say, if we can move this big battleship a few degrees in a different direction, we may not see all the consequences of that change a week from now or 3 months from now, but 10 years from now or 20 years from now, our kids will be able to look back and say that was when we started getting serious about clean energy; that's when health care started to become more efficient and affordable; that's when we became serious about raising our standards in education.
And one person here today who fits that description well enough is Jeanne Ebongue Tapo--right here. She grew up in a poor family in Gabon, Africa, the daughter of a single mother raising five children by herself. And Jeanne immigrated to the United States to provide for her family and to pursue her dream of becoming a dentist. And that's why she joined the Navy. And she hoped she'd have the opportunity to work and see the world and also earn her education.
I believe we can and must do exactly that. Over the course of our first hundred days in office, my administration has taken aggressive action to confront a historic economic crisis. We're doing everything that we can to create jobs and to get our economy moving while building a new foundation for lasting prosperity, a foundation that invests in quality education, lowers health care costs, and develops new sources of energy powered by new jobs and industries.
In a 21st century economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, education is the single best bet we can make, not just for our individual success, but for the success of the Nation as a whole. The average college graduate earns 80 percent more than those who stopped after high school. So if we want to help people not only get back on their feet today but prosper tomorrow, we need to take a rigorous new approach to higher education and technical training. And that starts by changing senseless rules that discourage displaced workers from getting the education and training they need to find and fill the jobs of the future.
So today I'm announcing new steps we are taking to do exactly that, to give people across America who have lost their jobs the chance to go back to school today to get retrained for the jobs and industries of tomorrow. The idea here is to fundamentally change our approach to unemployment in this country so that it's no longer just a time to look for a new job but is also a time to prepare yourself for a better job. That's what our unemployment system should be, not just a safety net, but a stepping stone to a new future. It should offer folks educational opportunities they wouldn't otherwise have, giving them the measurable and differentiated skills they need just--not just to get through hard times, but to get ahead when the economy comes back.
But today, far too many Americans are denied that opportunity. Let me just give you an example. Say an unemployed factory worker wants to upgrade his skills to become a mechanic or a technician. In many States, that worker might lose temporary financial support if he enrolls in a training program. And to make matters worse, unemployment might mean he can't afford higher education, and he likely won't qualify for Federal help simply because he may have made a decent salary a year ago, before he was laid off.
Well, that doesn't make much sense for our economy or our country. So we're going to change it. First, we'll open new doors to higher education and job training programs to recently laid-off workers who are receiving unemployment benefits. And if those displaced workers need help paying for their education, they should get it, and that's why the next step is to make it easier for them to receive Pell grants of the sort that Maureen used.
And together, these changes will increase access to education and opportunity for hundreds of thousands of workers who've been stung by this recession, people just like Maureen. And like her, many may take advantage of one of America's underappreciated assets, and that's our community colleges. And these schools offer practical education and technical training, and they're increasingly important centers of learning where Americans can prepare for the jobs of the future.
And that's also why I'm asking Dr. Jill Biden, a community college professor who's devoted her entire life to education--and who happens to be married to the Vice President--to lead a national effort to raise awareness about what we're doing to open the doors to our community colleges.
So I think this is one more piece of the puzzle. It's a good start. It is only a start, though. These steps are just a short-term downpayment on our larger goal of ensuring that all Americans get the skills and education they need to succeed in today's economy. And to that end, I have asked, once again, every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training. It can be community college or a 4-year school, vocational training or an apprenticeship, but whatever the training may be, every American will need to get more than a high school diploma. And we will be backing up that effort with the support necessary. And we will ensure that by 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
In the weeks to come, I will also lay out a fundamental rethinking of our job training, vocational education, and community college programs. It's time to move beyond the idea that we need several different programs to address several different problems. We need one comprehensive policy that addresses our comprehensive challenges.
Well, thank you. Thank you, President Crow, for that extremely generous introduction, for your inspired leadership as well here at ASU. And I want to thank the entire ASU community for the honor of attaching my name to a scholarship program that will help open the doors of higher education to students from every background. What a wonderful gift. Thank you. That notion of opening doors of opportunity to everybody, that is the core mission of this school; it's the core mission of my Presidency. And I hope this program will serve as a model for universities across this country. So thank you so much.
For many of you, these challenges are also felt in more personal terms. Perhaps you're still looking for a job or struggling to figure out what career path makes sense in this disrupted economy. Maybe you've got student loans--no, you definitely have student loans--or credit card debts, and you're wondering how you'll ever pay them off. Maybe you've got a family to raise, and you're wondering how you'll ensure that your children have the same opportunities you've had to get an education and pursue their dreams.
With a degree from this outstanding institution, you have everything you need to get started. You've got no excuses. You have no excuses not to change the world. Did you study business? Go start a company. Or why not help a struggling non-for-profit find better, more effective ways to serve folks in need. You study nursing? Understaffed clinics and hospitals across this country are desperate for your help. You study education? Teach in a high-need school where the kids really need you; give a chance to kids who can't get everything they need, maybe in their neighborhood, maybe not even in their home. But we can't afford to give up on--prepare them to compete for any job anywhere in the world. You study engineering? Help us lead a green revolution, developing new sources of clean energy that will power our economy and preserve our planet.
And so we're going to have to set what I'm calling a new foundation for growth, where people are less reliant on debt, they're living more within their means; businesses are engaging in more sensible business practices, they're investing in the future and the long-term and not short-term profits; we are focusing on clean energy; we're reforming our health care system; we are boosting our education system to produce more engineers and more scientists and retraining our workers so that we've got the most productive workers in the world. That's the strategy that we're going to be pursuing in the months and years to come.
We know these things, and hopefully, one of the benefits of the wonderful education that you've received here at Notre Dame is that you've had time to consider these wrongs in the world, perhaps recognized impulses in yourself that you want to leave behind. You've grown determined, each in your own way, to right them. And yet, one of the vexing things for those of us interested in promoting greater understanding and cooperation among people is the discovery that even bringing together persons of good will, bringing together men and women of principle and purpose, even accomplishing that can be difficult.
What bothered the doctor was an entry that my campaign staff had posted on my web site, an entry that said I would fight, quote, "right-wing ideologues who want to take away a woman's right to choose," unquote. The doctor said he had assumed I was a reasonable person, he supported my policy initiatives to help the poor and to lift up our educational system, but that if I truly believed that every pro-life individual was simply an ideologue who wanted to inflict suffering on women, then I was not very reasonable. He wrote, "I do not ask at this point that you oppose abortion, only that you speak about this issue in fair-minded words"--fair-minded words.
Now, you, class of 2009, are about to enter the next phase of your life at a time of great uncertainty. You'll be called to help restore a free market that's also fair to all who are willing to work. You'll be called to seek new sources of energy that can save our planet, to give future generations the same chance that you had to receive an extraordinary education. And whether as a person drawn to public service or simply someone who insists on being an active citizen, you will be exposed to more opinions and ideas broadcast through more means of communication than ever existed before. You'll hear talking heads scream on cable, and you'll read blogs that claim definitive knowledge, and you will watch politicians pretend they know what they're talking about. [Laughter] Occasionally, you may have the great fortune of actually seeing important issues debated by people who do know what they're talking about, by well-intentioned people with brilliant minds and mastery of the facts. In fact, I suspect that some of you will be among those brightest stars.
And that's why I'm here tonight. That's why I'm here, because I can't bring the change I promised all by myself. I can't rebuild our economy, and reform our health care system and our education system, and preserve our environment, and keep our Nation safe if I'm all alone in the Oval Office. That's not how our democracy works.
More than ever before, we need their help; America needs their help. We need their help to build schools that meet high standards, and close achievement gaps, and prepare our children for the 21st century challenges that they'll confront, where we reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement. And we need their help to reach the goal that I've set for higher education in this country, that by the year 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We used to have that distinction; we don't anymore. We are going to get it back with the help of these four gentlemen right here.
But obviously, one of the things that I've been concerned about since I took office is looking beyond the immediate crisis in front of us to find out what is a sustainable economic model post-bubble and bust. How do we create sound fundamentals on issues like education, on health care, and the topic that we're going to discuss today, energy, as well as all the innovation that's required around these various areas, so that moving forward, we don't find ourselves in a unsustainable economic model?
Mr. Feldstein. For those of us who work in the service industries, like education or health care, we don't want to knock that too much.
Sonia's parents came to New York from Puerto Rico during Second World War, her mother as part of the Women's Army Corps. And, in fact, her mother is here today, and I'd like us all to acknowledge Sonia's mom. Sonia's mom has been a little choked up. [Laughter] But she, Sonia's mother, began a family tradition of giving back to this country. Sonia's father was a factory worker with a third grade education who didn't speak English. But like Sonia's mother, he had a willingness to work hard, a strong sense of family, and a belief in the American Dream.
When Sonia was 9, her father passed away, and her mother worked 6 days a week as a nurse to provide for Sonia and her brother, who is also here today, is a doctor and a terrific success in his own right. But Sonia's mom bought the only set of encyclopedias in the neighborhood, sent her children to a Catholic school called Cardinal Spellman, out of a belief that with a good education here in America all things are possible.
But as impressive and meaningful as Judge Sotomayor's sterling credentials in the law are, her extraordinary life journey is even more exceptional. Born in the South Bronx--[applause]--raised in a--hey, South Bronx. We got everybody here. We got Searchlight, we got South Bronx. [Laughter] All right, I'm not going to shout out everybody's--[applause]. Where was I? [Laughter] I'm talking about the next Supreme Court Justice, born in the South Bronx, raised in a housing project by parents who came to New York from Puerto Rico during the Second World War. Father was a factory worker with a third grade education, didn't speak English. When Sonia was just 9, her father passed away. Her mother worked 6 days a week as a nurse to provide for Sonia and her brother, buying the only encyclopedias in the neighborhood, sending their children to Catholic school out of a belief that with a good education here in America all things are possible.
And that's why I'm here tonight, because I can't bring the change I promised all by myself. I can't rebuild an economy by myself. I can't reform our health care system and education systems and preserve our environment and keep our Nation safe all alone. That's not how it works. I need partners in Congress, leaders who are determined to make a difference for the folks they represent. And right now, more than ever before, we need their help. America needs their help. We need their help to build schools that meet high standards and close the achievement gap and prepare our kids for the challenges of the 21st century, reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement.
We need their help to reach the goal I've set for our education in this country that by 2020, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We need their help to pass a comprehensive energy and climate bill that will finally reduce our dangerous dependence on foreign oil, offer new energy incentives to reduce the pollution that threatens our health and our climate.
And finally, we will begin a national campaign to promote cybersecurity awareness and digital literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms and to build a digital workforce for the 21st century. And that's why we're making a new commitment to education in math and science and historic investments in science and research and development. Because it's not enough for our children and students to master today's technologies--social networking and e-mailing and texting and blogging--we need them to pioneer the technologies that will allow us to work effectively through these new media and allow us to prosper in the future. So these are the things we will do.
And her achievements are all the more impressive when you consider what she had to overcome in order to achieve them. Judge Sotomayor grew up in a housing project in the South Bronx. Her parents came to New York from Puerto Rico during the Second World War. Her father was a factory worker with a third grade education. And when she was just 9 years old, he passed away. Her mother worked 6 days a week as a nurse to provide for her and her brother, buying the only set of encyclopedias in the neighborhood and sending her children to Catholic school. That's what made it possible for Judge Sotomayor to attend two of America's leading universities, graduating at the top of her class at Princeton University, and studying at Yale Law School, where she won a prestigious post as an editor of the school's law journal.
The President. ----I think that has to be lifted up. And you're seeing some countries, I think, that are making more investments in education. I think the importance of educating women has to be something that's emphasized; if you look at indicators of human development across the board, those where girls are getting a chance for an education end up being more economically productive. How to reconcile this with some of the traditional values and norms of Islam, that's not for me to dictate, but, certainly, I think it's something that can be accomplished, and I want to encourage that.
Now, much has been made of the fact that an African American with the name Barack Hussein Obama could be elected President. But my personal story is not so unique. The dream of opportunity for all people has not come true for everyone in America, but its promise exists for all who come to our shores, and that includes nearly 7 million American Muslims in our country today, who, by the way, enjoy incomes and educational levels that are higher than the American average.
So let there be no doubt, Islam is a part of America. And I believe that America holds within her the truth that regardless of race, religion, or station in life, all of us share common aspirations to live in peace and security, to get an education and to work with dignity, to love our families, our communities, and our God. These things we share. This is the hope of all humanity.
The sixth issue that I want to address is women's rights. I know--[applause]--I know, and you can tell from this audience, that there is a healthy debate about this issue. I reject the view of some in the West that a woman who chooses to cover her hair is somehow less equal, but I do believe that a woman who is denied an education is denied equality. And it is no coincidence that countries where women are well educated are far more likely to be prosperous.
But I also know that human progress cannot be denied. There need not be contradictions between development and tradition. Countries like Japan and South Korea grew their economies enormously while maintaining distinct cultures. The same is true for the astonishing progress within Muslim-majority countries from Kuala Lumpur to Dubai. In ancient times and in our times, Muslim communities have been at the forefront of innovation and education.
And this is important, because no development strategy can be based only upon what comes out of the ground, nor can it be sustained while young people are out of work. Many Gulf States have enjoyed great wealth as a consequence of oil, and some are beginning to focus it on broader development. But all of us must recognize that education and innovation will be the currency of the 21st century, and in too many Muslim communities there remains underinvestment in these areas. I'm emphasizing such investment within my own country. And while America in the past has focused on oil and gas when it comes to this part of the world, we now seek a broader engagement.
On education, we will expand exchange programs and increase scholarships like the one that brought my father to America. At the same time, we will encourage more Americans to study in Muslim communities. And we will match promising Muslim students with internships in America, invest in online learning for teachers and children around the world, and create a new online network so a young person in Kansas can communicate instantly with a young person in Cairo.
And in both France and in the United States, we have enormous Muslim populations. So as I said in the Cairo speech, there's no contradiction between America and Islam because we have Muslim Americans who actually have higher education and income averages than is the average in the United States. That's a testament to the degree to which they've been able to succeed, thrive, remain true to their religion, and be full-fledged, patriotic Americans. And that kind of approach, I think, is the one that we want, as opposed to an approach that increases tensions both within our borders and outside of our borders.
As a nation, we have several imperatives at this difficult moment in our history. We're confronting the worst recession this country has faced in generations, and this has required extraordinary investments in the short term. Another imperative is addressing long-deferred priorities--health care, energy, education--which threaten the American economy and the well-being of American families. And we've begun to tackle these problems as well.
One of the things that I've learned in education in the last 20 years is that the system is not broken. And it bothers me when I hear politicians, and even my President, say that our educational system is broken. Not to insult you, but----
I completely agree with you that there is a lot of good stuff going on in American education. The problem is, is that it's uneven. And, well, let me put it this way. There are actually two problems. In some places, it is completely broken. In some urban communities, where you've got 50 percent of the kids dropping out, you only have 1 out of every 10 children who are graduating at grade level, this system is broken for them.
It used to be by a pretty sizable factor: We had the highest high school graduation rates; we had the highest college graduation rates; we had the highest number of Ph.D.s, the highest number of engineers and scientists. We used to be head and shoulders above other countries when it came to education. We aren't anymore. We're sort of in the middle of the pack now among wealthy, advanced, industrialized countries.
So here's the bottom line: We've got to improve; we've got to step up our game, which brings me to the next point in your question, which is, how do we do that? I agree with you that if all we're doing is spreading around a lot of standardized tests and teaching to the test, that's not improving our education system. All right?
And so there's a saying in Illinois I learned when I was down in a lot of rural communities. They said, "Just weighing a pig doesn't fatten it." [Laughter] You can weigh it all the time, but it's not making the hog fatter. So the point being, if we're--all we're doing is testing and then teaching to the test, that doesn't assure that we're actually improving educational outcomes.
Now, the key point I want to make is this: We should focus on what works, based on good data. And Arne Duncan, my Secretary of Education, this guy is just obsessed with improving our education system. He is focused a hundred percent on it, and he is completely committed to teachers. He--we think that teachers are the most important ingredient in good schools. We're going to do whatever works to help teachers do a better job. We're going to eliminate those things that don't help teachers do a good job. Some of it is going to require more money, so in our Recovery Act, we had more money for improving curriculums, teacher training, recruitment, a lot of these things. But you can't just put more money without reform, and so some of it is demanding more accountability and more reform.
There's one other ingredient, though, and that is parents. We've got to have parents putting more emphasis on education with our kids. That's how we're all going to be able to pick up our game.
Some of it is that I have proposed some investments in education and in energy and in health information technologies. But there was just an article in the New York Times yesterday that showed that all that stuff, everything that I've proposed--my stimulus package, what we've done in terms of bailing out the financial system, all that stuff--that accounts for maybe 7, 8 percent of what you've seen in terms of increased debt and deficits. The real problem is Medicaid and Medicare. That's the nightmare scenario. If we can bend the curve, the cost curve down so that health care inflation is no more than ordinary inflation, it's matching up with the amount of increases that you're seeing on your paychecks, in your wages and your incomes, then we're going to be okay. And if I--we don't get a handle on it, we're not going to be okay. It doesn't matter, you know, that we eliminate earmarks or do all that other stuff. That won't make any difference; we'll still be consumed by huge debt for the next generation.
And we need to rethink the cost of a medical education, and do more to reward medical students who choose a career as a primary care physician, who choose to work in underserved areas instead of the more lucrative paths. That's why we're making a substantial investment in the National Health Service Corps that will make medical training more affordable for primary care doctors and nurse practitioners so they aren't drowning in debt when they enter the workforce. [Applause] Somebody back there is drowning in debt, they were applauding. [Laughter]
That's why, as part of this new foundation, we're seeking to build an energy economy that creates new jobs and new businesses to free us from our dependence on foreign oil. We want to foster an education system that instills in each generation the capacity to turn ideas into innovations, and innovations into industries and jobs. And as I discussed on Monday at the American Medical Association, we want to reform our health care system so that we can remain healthy and competitive.
Now, over the past two decades, we've seen time and again cycles of precipitous booms and busts. In each case, millions of people have had their lives profoundly disrupted by developments in the financial system, most severely in our recent crisis. These aren't just numbers on a ledger. This is a child's chance to get an education. This is a family's ability to pay their bills or stay in their homes. This is the right of our seniors to retire with dignity and security and respect. These are American dreams, and we should not accept a system that consistently puts them in danger. Financial institutions have an obligation to put--to themselves and to the public to manage risks carefully. And as President, I have a responsibility to ensure that our financial system works for the economy as a whole.
Five months. Every Member of Congress who helped make these reforms possible should feel proud of what we've accomplished. But we shouldn't feel satisfied. We should feel confident in the future, but not content with the present, not when there are workers out there who are still looking for a job and families who are still unable to pay their bills. Not when there are millions of Americans who are trying to figure out whether they can afford health care and millions more of our children who are being left behind in our education system. We can't be satisfied when our Nation is not leading the world in developing a 21st century energy economy.
I need partners in Congress, leaders who are determined to make a difference for the folks they represent. And right now, more than ever before, we need their help; America needs their help. We need their help to build schools that meet high standards, and close the achievement gap, and prepare our kids for the challenges of the 21st century, where we reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement. We need their help to reach the goal that I've set for higher education in this country, that by the year 2020, America once again will have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
In the 21st century, we've learned that this truth is central not just to our own lives, but to our success as a nation. If our children cannot get the world-class education they need to succeed, then America will not be able to compete with other countries. If our families cannot afford health care, then the costs go up for all of us: individuals, businesses, and government. If folks down the street can't pay their mortgage and folks across town can't find a job, then that pain is going to trickle into other parts of our economy.
This is a very, very difficult process. And what I've got to do is to make sure that we're focused both on the short term, how can we provide families immediate relief and jump-start the economy as quickly as possible. And I've got to keep my eye on the long term, and the long term is making sure that by reforming our health care system, by passing serious energy legislation that makes us a clean energy economy, by revamping our education system, by finally getting the financial regulatory reforms in place that are necessary for the 21st century--by doing all those things, we've got a foundation for long-term economic growth, and we don't end up having to juice up the economy artificially through the kinds of bubble strategies that helped to get us in the situation that we're in today. Okay?
And we have congratulated President Obama because of all its foreign policy, all of its efforts to not only nationally but also internationally have a good response to the economic crisis. We have been exchanging point of view on how we can also be part of the solution in the Latin American region to cope with--to respond to this economic crisis, how to assure that the countries of Latin America can have the capitals--the flows of capital that they need in order to recover the economy, and be able to tackle challenges like poverty, like health problems, and educational problems, and so on.
And I was very clear in Trinidad and Tobago at the Summit of the Americas that we are interested in a partnership in which we are focused on, how can we improve the day-to-day living standards of ordinary people? And that that focus on human development is one that transcends boundaries, should transcend ideologies. I don't have a litmus test in terms of, you know, whether a government is center-right, center-left, this or that. My approach is, if the United States is working together with a country to promote the well-being, the health, the education, the economic opportunities of people in both countries, then we're going to have a good relationship. And I'm confident that we are moving in that direction, and I think that Chile is going to be an excellent partner in that process.
And all of them represent States that have done some terrific work, wonderful experiments, have seen successes. But all of these Governors also expressed to me, and I think heard from their constituencies, deep concerns about what the future holds. I think there's a recognition that when you have premiums doubling three times faster than wages, when you have businesses seeing 25- or 30-percent increases in terms of their health care costs for their employees, when you look at Medicaid budgets and what that's forcing Governors to do in terms of making choices about trying to still fund higher education and the other things that are going to make States competitive, there's a recognition that we have to change the status quo.
The President. Right. And so one of the things that we've got to figure out is how to change that calculation. Now, you may still go into primary care, and I hope you do. But I don't want to make it tougher for you; I want to make it easier for you. And one of the things that I'd like to explore--and I've been working with the administration and with Congress is--are their loan forgiveness programs where people commit to a certain number of years of primary care. That reduces the costs for their medical education. That would make a significant difference.
And so what I want to do is just remind people, if you go to serve.gov--serve.gov--that will give you an entire toolkit for how you can sign up for service in your communities. So there's no excuses. And you can find the service project that's right for you. If you care about animals, you can find a shelter that helps with stray animals. If you care about tutoring kids or you've got an education background, you'll be able to find something that allows you to use your particular skills.

We have had opportunity to speak about many topics, as President Obama has said. I said to President Obama, I made to him some comments about confidence in Colombia; about security, the advances, the problems we still face; about investment, its relationship with the free trade agreement as a signal to give confidence in Colombia; and about social cohesion, the advances in education, in microlending, in health; the problems we still face, problems in poverty, in income distribution.
I have said to President Obama about the importance of the help of the United States for us and the region as a whole to advance in social cohesion; help directly from the United States or through the multilateral banks. For instance, in education and in child nutrition, we have advanced a lot, but we lack infrastructure; coverage has surpassed infrastructure. In child nutrition, we have advanced a lot, but we lack coverage in education for those under 6, not to mention other of our problems. But we have a recognition to advance in security, human rights, state restructure, to advance in economics, to advance in social cohesion. And for all these things, it is very important to have this permanent support of President Obama, of the Government of the United States, of the Congress of the United State.
We passed a budget resolution that helps to cut our deficit in half while laying the foundations for all the building blocks required for a post-bubble economy: reforming our health care system, initiating a clean energy agenda, revamping our education system so that our kids can compete in the 21st century.
Now, the people I worked with in those early days in Chicago, they were looking for the same thing that Americans everyplace aspire to. We're not a nation of people who are looking for handouts. We certainly don't like bailouts. [Laughter] We don't believe government should be in the business of helping people who refuse to help themselves, and we recognize not every government program works. But we do expect hard work to pay off. We do expect responsibility to be rewarded. We do expect that if you put in enough effort, you should be able to find a job that pays the bills. You should be able to own a home you call your own. You should be able to retire in dignity and respect. You should be able to afford the security of health care, and you should be able to give your kids the best education possible.

But it also begins with an early childhood education, which is why we've invested more in childcare, and in programs like Early Head Start and Head Start that help prepare our young people for success. It's the right thing to do for America.

Our education policy hasn't just been based on more money, we've also called for real reform. So we challenged every State in the country to raise their standards for teaching and for learning. And 3 years later, nearly every State has answered the call. We have seen the biggest transformation in terms of school reform in a generation, and we've helped some of the country's lowest performing schools make real gains in reading and math, including here in New Orleans.

We've made it our mission to make a higher education more affordable for every American who wants to go to school. That's why we fought to extend our college tuition tax credit for working families, saving millions of families thousands of dollars.

That's why tomorrow I'm establishing the first-ever White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for African Americans, so that every child has greater access to a complete and competitive education from the time they're born all through the time they get a career.

And that's why we're pushing all colleges and universities to cut their costs, because we can't keep asking taxpayers to subsidize skyrocketing tuition. A higher education in the 21st century cannot be a luxury. It is a vital necessity that every American should be able to afford. I want all these young people to be getting a higher education, and I don't want them loaded up with tens of thousands of dollars of debt just to get an education. That's how we make America great.

The President. Jeremy, first of all, your future is bright. And the fact that you're making an investment in higher education is critical not just to you, but to the entire Nation. Now, the most important thing we can do is to make sure that we are creating jobs in this country, but not just jobs, good-paying jobs, ones that can support a family.
Number two, we've got to make sure that we have the best education system in the world. And the fact that you're going to college is great, but I want everybody to get a great education. And we've worked hard to make sure that student loans are available for folks like you. But I also want to make sure that community colleges are offering slots for workers to get retrained for the jobs that are out there right now and the jobs of the future.
We've got to reduce our deficit, but we've got to do it in a balanced way, asking the wealthy to pay a little bit more along with cuts so that we can invest in education like yours. And let's take the money that we've been spending on war over the last decade to rebuild America: roads, bridges, schools. We do those things, not only is your future going to be bright, but America's future is going to be bright as well.
My grandmother, she started off as a secretary in a bank. She never got a college education even though she was smart as a whip. And she worked her way up to become a vice president at a local bank, but she hit the glass ceiling. She trained people who would end up becoming her bosses during the course of her career. She didn't complain. That's not what you did in that generation.
It also means that we've got to make sure that young people like yourself are able to afford a college education. Earlier, Governor Romney talked about—he wants to make Pell grants and other education accessible for young people. Well, the truth of the matter is, is that that's exactly what we've done. We've expanded Pell grants for millions of people, including millions of young women all across the country. We did it by taking $60 billion that was going to banks and lenders as middlemen for the student loan program, and we said, let's just cut out the middleman. Let's give the money directly to students. And as a consequence, we've seen millions of young people be able to afford college, and that's going to make sure that young women are going to be able to compete in that marketplace.
Now, does that mean you're not struggling? Absolutely not. A lot of us are. And that's why the plan that I've put forward for manufacturing and education and reducing our deficit in a sensible way, using the savings from ending wars to rebuild America and putting people back to work, making sure that we are controlling our own energy, but not just the energy of today, but also the energy of the future—all those things will make a difference.
So the point is, the commitments I've made, I've kept. And those that I haven't been able to keep, it's not for lack of trying, and we're going to get it done in a second term. But you should pay attention to this campaign, because Governor Romney has made some commitments as well, and I suspect he'll keep those too. When Members of the Republican Congress say, we're going to sign a no-tax pledge so that we don't ask a dime from millionaires and billionaires to reduce our deficit so we can still invest in education and helping kids go to college, he said, me too.
What I believe is, we have to do, as the President mentioned towards the end of his remarks there, which is to make enormous efforts to enforce the gun laws that we have and to change the culture of violence we have. And you ask, how are we going to do that? And there are a number of things. He mentioned good schools. I totally agree. We were able to drive our schools to be number one in the Nation in my State, and I believe if we do a better job in education, we'll give people the hope and opportunity they deserve and perhaps less violence from that.
And, Candy, we haven't had a chance to talk about education much, but I think it is very important to understand that the reforms we've put in place, working with 46 Governors around the country, are seeing schools that are some of the ones that are the toughest for kids starting to succeed; we're starting to see gains in math and science.
When it comes to community colleges, we are setting up programs, including with Nassau Community College, to retrain workers, including young people who may have dropped out of school, but now are getting another chance, training them for the jobs that exist right now. And in fact, employers are looking for skilled workers, and so we're matching them up, giving them access to higher education. As I said, we have made sure that millions of young people are able to get an education that they weren't able to get before. Now——
A lot of things go in—are involved in that, Jake. So making sure they've got decent health care and making sure they've got a good education, making sure that their parents have jobs—those are all relevant as well. Those aren't just sort of side issues. But there's no doubt that this has to be a central issue. And that's exactly why I'm confident that Joe is going to take this so seriously over the next couple months.

And that's why Speaker Boehner and I originally tried to negotiate a larger agreement that would put this country on a path to paying down its debt while also putting Americans back to work rebuilding our roads and bridges and providing investments in areas like education and job training. Unfortunately, there just wasn't enough support or time for that kind of large agreement in a lame duck session of Congress. And that failure comes with a cost, as the messy nature of the process over the past several weeks has made business more uncertain and consumers less confident.
I believe we can find more places to cut spending without shortchanging things like education, job training, research, and technology, all of which are critical to our prosperity in a 21st-century economy. But spending cuts must be balanced with more reforms to our Tax Code. The wealthiest individuals and the biggest corporations shouldn't be able to take advantage of loopholes and deductions that aren't available to most Americans.
As I said on the campaign, one component to growing our economy and broadening opportunity for the middle class is shrinking our deficits in a balanced and responsible way. And for nearly 2 years now, I've been fighting for such a plan, one that would reduce our deficits by $4 trillion over the next decade, which would stabilize our debt and our deficit in a sustainable way for the next decade. That would be enough not only to stop the growth of our debt relative to the size of our economy, but it would make it manageable so it doesn't crowd out the investments we need to make in people and education and job training and science and medical research—all the things that help us grow.
The fact is, though, we can't finish the job of deficit reduction through spending cuts alone. The cuts we've already made to priorities other than Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security, and defense mean that we spend on everything from education to public safety less as a share of our economy than it has—than has been true for a generation. And that's not a recipe for growth.
So we've got to do more both to stabilize our finances over the medium and long term, but also spur more growth in the short term. Now, I've said I've—I'm open to making modest adjustments to programs like Medicare to protect them for future generations. I've also said that we need more revenue through tax reform by closing loopholes in our Tax Code for the wealthiest Americans. If we combine a balanced package of savings from spending on health care and revenues from closing loopholes, we can solve the deficit issue without sacrificing our investments in things like education that are going to help us grow.
So let's finish this debate. Let's give our businesses and the world the certainty that our economy and our reputation are still second to none. We pay our bills. We handle our business. And then we can move on, because America has a lot to do. We've got to create more jobs. We've got to boost the wages of those who have work. And we've got to reach for energy independence. We've got to reform our immigration system. We've got to give our children the best education possible, and we've got to do everything we can to protect them from the horrors of gun violence.
Now, as I indicated before, I'm happy to have a conversation about how we reduce our deficits further in a sensible way. Although, one thing I want to point out is that the American people are also concerned about how we grow our economy, how we put people back to work, how we make sure that we finance our workers getting properly trained and our schools are giving our kids the education we deserve. There's a whole growth agenda which will reduce our deficits that's important as well.
The President. No, Julianna, look, this is pretty straightforward. Either Congress pays its bills, or it doesn't. Now, if—and they want to keep this responsibility; if John Boehner and Mitch McConnell think that they can come up with a plan that somehow meets their criteria that they've set for why they will—when they will raise the debt ceiling, they're free to go ahead and try. But the proposals that they've put forward in order to accomplish that—only by cutting spending—means cuts to things like Medicare and education that the American people profoundly reject.
And that view was rejected by the American people when it was debated during the Presidential campaign. I think every poll that's out there indicates that the American people actually think our commitment to Medicare or to education is really important, and that's something that we should look at as a last resort in terms of reducing the deficit, and it makes a lot more sense for us to close, for example, corporate loopholes before we go to putting a bigger burden on students or seniors.
That means bringing in people like Mary Jo and Richard whose job it is to stand up for you. It means encouraging businesses to create more jobs and pay higher wages and improving education and job training so that more people can get the skills that businesses are looking for. It means reforming our immigration system and keeping our children safe from the menace of gun violence. And it means bringing down our deficit in a balanced way by making necessary reforms and asking every American to pay their fair share.
The truth is that most of the big issues that are going to make a difference in the life of this country for the next thirty or forty years are complicated and require tough decisions, but are not rocket science. We know that to fix our economy, we've got to make sure: that we have the most competitive workforce in the world, that we have a better education system, that we are investing in research and development, that we've got world-class infrastructure, that we're reducing our health care costs, and that we're expanding our exports. On issues like immigration, we have a pretty good sense of what's broken in the system and how to fix it. On climate change, it's a daunting task. But we know what releases carbon into the atmosphere, and we have tools right now that would start scaling that back, although we'd still need some big technological breakthrough.
But if we can get through this first period and arrive at a sensible package that reduces our deficits, stabilizes our debts, and involves smart reforms to Medicare and judicious spending cuts with some increased revenues and maybe tax reform, and you can get a package together that doesn't satisfy either Democrats or Republicans entirely, but puts us on a growth trajectory because it leaves enough spending on education, research and development, and infrastructure to boost growth now, but also deals with our long-term challenges on health care costs, then you can imagine the Republicans saying to themselves, "OK, we need to get on the side of the American majority on issues like immigration. We need to make progress on rebuilding our roads and bridges."
The President: Well, I spoke about my vision at the inauguration. You know, America has everything that it needs to be not just a great country, but a country that is leading the world on so many important issues. But we just have to come together and recognize what is it that is most important to us. What makes us special. And what makes us special more than anything is the fact that we believe in hard work. We believe that if you work hard you should be able to succeed, that you should be able to pay your bills and support a family. So I want to leave behind a legacy where the economy once again works for the middle class and people who are striving to get in the middle class. That kids who want a good education can get a good education. That everybody whose willing to work hard can make it. And the other thing is that it includes everybody. Right? That we're not saying, there's some Americans who make it, but some who don't. There's some who look like this, or some who, you know, had that sexual orientation or some people who had that perspective and somehow they're not as important. You know, what has always been a hallmark of America even when we didn't always live up to the ideal, was this ideal that, you know, we hold these truths to be self evident. That all men are created equal.

And that means that what you'll hear from me next week, I'm going to be talking about making sure that we're focused on job creation here in the United States of America. It means that we're focused on education and that every young person is equipped with the skills they need to compete in the 21st century. It means that we've got an energy agenda that can make us less dependent on foreign oil, but also that we're cultivating the kind of clean energy strategy that will maintain our leadership well into the future.
Now, the reason this is relevant is because I gather—and I haven't gotten this from firsthand sources, but from secondhand sources in the press—that our friends on the other side of the aisle, their position is: We're concerned about the sequester. We recognize that just cutting the Federal spending with a meat ax, as opposed to scalpel, is probably damaging; it will damage our national security; it will damage our educational system. We'll have kids getting kicked off of Head Start. It will mean people who have disabled kids suddenly having less help.
And I have to tell you, if that's an argument that they want to have before the court of public opinion, that is an argument I'm more than willing to engage in. Because I believe the American people understand, I believe the American people understand that yes, we need to reduce the deficit, but it shouldn't just be on the backs of seniors; it shouldn't just be on the backs of young people who are trying to get a college education; it should not just be on the backs of parents who are trying to give their kids a better start in life; that all of us have to participate; and that if, in fact, it's important for us to make sure we've got a strong national defense and that we reduce our spending in a smart way, we sure as heck should be willing to ask those of us who are luckiest in this society to close a few loopholes and deductions that the average American doesn't get.
In 2011, Congress passed a law saying that if both parties couldn't agree on a plan to reach our deficit goal, about a trillion dollars' worth of budget cuts would automatically go into effect this year. These sudden, harsh, arbitrary cuts would jeopardize our military readiness. They'd devastate priorities like education and energy and medical research. They would certainly slow our recovery and cost us hundreds of thousands of jobs. And that's why Democrats, Republicans, business leaders, and economists have already said that these cuts—known here in Washington as the sequester—are a really bad idea.
Now, some in Congress have proposed preventing only the defense cuts by making even bigger cuts to things like education and job training, Medicare, and Social Security benefits. That idea is even worse.
To hit the rest of our deficit reduction target, we should do what leaders in both parties have already suggested and save hundreds of billions of dollars by getting rid of tax loopholes and deductions for the well-off and the well-connected. After all, why would we choose to make deeper cuts to education and Medicare just to protect special interest tax breaks? How is that fair? Why is it that deficit reduction is a big emergency justifying making cuts in Social Security benefits, but not closing some loopholes? How does that promote growth?
And that has to start at the earliest possible age. Study after study shows that the sooner a child begins learning, the better he or she does down the road. But today, fewer than 3 in 10 4-year-olds are enrolled in a high-quality preschool program. Most middle class parents can't afford a few hundred bucks a week for a private preschool. And for poor kids who need help the most, this lack of access to preschool education can shadow them for the rest of their lives. So tonight I propose working with States to make high-quality preschool available to every single child in America. That's something we should be able to do.
Every dollar we invest in high-quality early childhood education can save more than 7 dollars later on: by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing violent crime. In States that make it a priority to educate our youngest children, like Georgia or Oklahoma, studies show students grow up more likely to read and do math at grade level, graduate high school, hold a job, form more stable families of their own. We know this works. So let's do what works and make sure none of our children start the race of life already behind. Let's give our kids that chance.
And 4 years ago, we started Race to the Top, a competition that convinced almost every State to develop smarter curricula and higher standards, all for about 1 percent of what we spend on education each year. Tonight I'm announcing a new challenge to redesign America's high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high-tech economy. And we'll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and employers and create classes that focus on science, technology, engineering, and math: the skills today's employers are looking for to fill the jobs that are there right now and will be there in the future.
Now, even with better high schools, most young people will need some higher education. It's a simple fact: The more education you've got, the more likely you are to have a good job and work your way into the middle class. But today, skyrocketing costs price too many young people out of a higher education or saddle them with unsustainable debt.
Through tax credits, grants, and better loans, we've made college more affordable for millions of students and families over the last few years. But taxpayers can't keep on subsidizing higher and higher and higher costs for higher education. Colleges must do their part to keep costs down, and it's our job to make sure that they do.
So tonight I ask Congress to change the Higher Education Act so that affordability and value are included in determining which colleges receive certain types of Federal aid. And tomorrow my administration will release a new college scorecard that parents and students can use to compare schools based on a simple criterion: where you can get the most bang for your educational buck.
Now, to grow our middle class, our citizens have to have access to the education and training that today's jobs require. But we also have to make sure that America remains a place where everyone who's willing to work—everybody who's willing to work hard—has the chance to get ahead.
Let's offer incentives to companies that hire Americans who've got what it takes to fill that job opening, but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance anymore. Let's put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in rundown neighborhoods. And this year, my administration will begin to partner with 20 of the hardest hit towns in America to get these communities back on their feet. Now, we'll work with local leaders to target resources at public safety and education and housing.
We will keep faith with our veterans, investing in world-class care—including mental health care—for our wounded warriors, supporting our military families, giving our veterans the benefits and education and job opportunities that they have earned. And I want to thank my wife Michelle and Dr. Jill Biden for their continued dedication to serving our military families as well as they have served us. Thank you, honey. Thank you, Jill.
Those parents—those parents supporting kids—that's the single most important thing. Unconditional love for your child, that makes a difference. If a child grows up with parents who have work and have some education and can be role models and can teach integrity and responsibility and discipline and delayed gratification—all those things give a child the kind of foundation that allows them to say, my future, I can make it what I want. And we've got to make sure that every child has that, and in some cases, we may have to fill the gap and the void if children don't have that.
We also know, though, that there is no surer path to success in the middle class than a good education. And what we now know is that that has to begin in the earliest years. Study after study shows that the earlier a child starts learning, the more likely they are to succeed: the more likely they are to do well at Hyde Park Academy; the more likely they are to graduate; the more likely they are to get a good job; the more likely they are to form stable families and then be able to raise children themselves who get off to a good start.
Chicago already has a competition, thanks to what the mayor is doing, that rewards the best preschools in the city; so Rahm has already prioritized this. But what I've also done is say, let's give every child across America access to high-quality, public preschool. Every child, not just some. Every dollar we put into early childhood education can save $7 down the road by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, reducing violent crime, reducing the welfare rolls, making sure that folks who have work, now they're paying taxes. All this stuff pays back huge dividends if we make the investment. So let's make this happen. Let's make sure every child has the chance they deserve.
So we know how important families are. We know how important education is. We recognize that government alone can't solve these problems of violence and poverty, that everybody has to be involved. But we also have to remember that the broader economic environment of communities is critical as well. For example, we need to make sure that folks who are working now, often in the hardest jobs, see their work rewarded with wages that allow them to raise a family without falling into poverty.
First of all, we'll work with local leaders to cut through redtape and improve things like public safety and education and housing. And we'll bring all the resources to bear in a coordinated fashion so that we can get that tipping point where suddenly a community starts feeling like things are changing and we can come back.
Second of all, if you're willing to play a role in a child's education, then we'll help you reform your schools. We want to seed more and more partnerships of the kind that Rahm is trying to set up.
The good news is, the American people are strong, and they're resilient. They fought hard to recover from the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, and we will get through this as well. Even with these cuts in place, folks all across this country will work hard to make sure that we keep the recovery going. But Washington sure isn't making it easy. At a time when our businesses have finally begun to get some traction—hiring new workers, bringing jobs back to America—we shouldn't be making a series of dumb, arbitrary cuts to things that businesses depend on and workers depend on, like education and research and infrastructure and defense. It's unnecessary. And at a time when too many Americans are still looking for work, it's inexcusable.
The President. Look, we've already cut $2.5 trillion in our deficit. Everybody says we need to cut $4 trillion, which means we have to come up with another trillion and a half. The vast majority of economists agree that the problem when it comes to deficits is not discretionary spending. It's not that we're spending too much money on education. It's not that we're spending too much money on job training or that we're spending too much money rebuilding our roads and our bridges. We're not.
We have a Budget Control Act, right? We agreed to a certain amount of money that was going to be spent each year and certain funding levels for our military, our education system, and so forth. If we stick to that deal, then I will be supportive of us sticking to that deal. It's a deal that I made.
Now, I expect that we'll be able to manage around it. But if I'm a man or woman in uniform in Afghanistan right now, the notion that my spouse back home is having to worry about whether or not our kids are getting the best education possible, the notion that my school for my children on an Army base might be disrupted because Congress didn't act, that's an impact. Now, Mayor Bloomberg and others may not feel that impact. I suspect they won't. But that family will.
Now, what is absolutely true is, is that not everybody is going to feel it. Not everybody is going to feel it all at once. What is true is that the accumulation of those stories all across this country, folks who suddenly—might have been working all their lives to get an education, just so that they can get that job and get out of welfare, and they've got their kid in Head Start, and now, suddenly, that Head Start slot is gone, and they're trying to figure out: How am I going to keep my job, because I can't afford childcare for my kid. Some of the suppliers for those shipbuilders down in Virginia, where you've got some suppliers who are small businesses, this is all they do, and they may shut down those companies, and their employees are going to be laid off. The accumulation of all of those stories of impact is going to make our economy weaker. It's going to mean less growth. It's going to mean hundreds of thousands of jobs lost.
The President. Well, a couple of things. Number one is to make sure that we keep making progress wherever we can on things that are important to middle class Americans and those who are fighting to get into the middle class. So if you set aside budget fights for a second, we've been able to get now the Violence Against Women Act done. The conversations that are taking place on a bipartisan basis around immigration reform are moving forward. We've seen great interest in a bipartisan fashion around how we can continue to improve our education system, including around early childhood education. There have been constructive discussions around how do we reduce gun violence.
As a nation, we've already fought back from the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes and we'll get through this too. But at a time when our businesses are finally gaining some traction, hiring new workers, bringing jobs back to America, the last thing Washington should do is to get in their way. That's what these cuts to education and research and defense will do. It's unnecessary. And at a time when too many of our friends and neighbors are still looking for work, it's inexcusable.
It makes sense for us to take a balanced approach that takes a long view and doesn't reduce our commitment to things like education and basic research that will help us grow over the long term. And so I will continue to seek out partners on the other side of the aisle so that we can create the kind of balanced approach of spending cuts, revenues, entitlement reform that everybody knows is the right way to do things.
So in addition to talking about budget issues, we're also going to spend some time talking about making sure that we have comprehensive immigration reform done. And I want to again thank Members of Congress who on a bipartisan basis are moving forward on that agenda. We're going to have the opportunity to talk about initiatives like early childhood education that can have an enormous impact on our kids and, ultimately, our growth and productivity. We'll have a chance to hear from Joe and other members of the Cabinet about progress in reducing gun violence in this country.
As Democrats and Republicans, we may disagree on the best way to achieve our goals, but I'm confident we can agree on what those goals should be: a strong and vibrant middle class; an economy that allows businesses to grow and thrive; an education system that gives more Americans the skills they need to compete for the jobs of the future; an immigration system that actually works for families and businesses; stronger communities; and safer streets for our children.
And when it comes to issues of the budget, we've made progress in making sure that those at the very top are paying a greater share of what is required to run a Government and fund basic research, move education forward.
And so we've seen some progress. And I laid out in both the Inauguration and in the State of the Union a vision that doesn't require massive expansion of Government, but does require us to do certain things that we can't do as well by ourselves: whether it's providing early childhood education; whether it's investing in infrastructure so that our businesses can move goods and services more rapidly around the world; whether it's continuing to expand our manufacturing base and encouraging insourcing and not just outsourcing; whether it's making sure that we continue to be at the cutting edge of science and technology and research; or whether we are going to choose an energy future that doesn't just look at the energy source of the past, but also looks at the energy sources of tomorrow and addresses climate change in a serious way.
We're going to push on this issue each and every day, and make sure we get the middle class going again. We're going to fix our economy. We're going to fix our immigration system. We are going to make sure that our young people are getting a great education. We're going to prevent them from being victims of gun violence. We are going to make sure that everybody in this country has a fair shot and is doing their fair share so that when we pass on this country to the next generation and the generation after that, we'll be able to once again say that here in the United States of America, it doesn't matter what you look like or where you come from, if you work hard, you can make it.
But I would be dishonest if I didn't say that it would be a whole lot easier to govern if I had Nancy Pelosi as Speaker. [Laughter] Because here are the stakes: I actually think we've got a great chance of getting immigration reform done. I think we have a good chance of getting serious gun safety legislation done. But if we're going to move forward on some of the other things I talked about in the State of the Union—making sure that we've got early childhood education for every child in America so that they can—[inaudible].
On so many issues, we've made progress. But we've got so much more work to do. And I laid out what that vision might look like during both the Inauguration speech and in the State of the Union. I want to make sure that we've got the best education system in the world and that starts young. And so we've given all the research that we have. Expanding our investment in childhood education can make all the difference in the world and will pay enormous dividends for a very, very long time.
And you believe that too. That's why you're here. In order for us to do that, you're going to have to stay involved. Think about some of the things I spoke about during the State of the Union Address: making sure that every child in America has outstanding, high quality, early childhood education. We know that there's nothing more important to a child's success than those early years. And if we do that right, not only are we going to see better performance in our schools, we're going to see better performance in our economy. And we can do it. We can afford to do it.
Making sure that we're providing ladders of opportunity in communities all across the country that have been left behind—and in some cases, have been behind for decades—so that we're not just investing in education, but also making sure that we're providing transportation assistance and tax credits so that impoverished communities can be part of this global economy. That will make us all stronger. I can't do that unless I have your help.
So we will continue to pursue advances in science and engineering, in infrastructure and innovation, in education and environmental protection, especially science-based initiatives to help us minimize and adapt to global threats like climate change.
Thirdly, we have agreed to boost our economy and our potential; we have agreed to create a bilateral forum on higher education, innovation, and research. Two government agencies will work together—CONACYT and the National Science Foundation from the U.S.—and presidents from Mexico and U.S. universities will be part of this group. And by this, more exchanges will happen between Mexico and the U.S., and students coming from the U.S. to Mexico.
We have agreed that higher education serves as a platform to boost the economic potential that we have in our nations. In order to compete with the world, specifically with highly developed countries where science and technology have been the target of their efforts and investment, it is fundamental that we have well-prepared youngsters with the skills necessary to give our economic development a greater strength and a greater capacity.
Consider that graduates of this university serve their country through the Peace Corps and educate our children through established programs like Teach for America, startups like Blue Engine, often earning little pay for making the biggest impact. Some of you have already launched startup companies of your own. And I suspect that those of you who pursue more education or climb the corporate ladder or enter the arts or science or journalism, you will still choose a cause that you care about in your life and you will fight like heck to realize your vision.
To educate more children at a younger age and to reform our high schools for a new time and to give more young people the chance to earn the kind of education that you did at the Ohio State University and to make it more affordable so that young people don't leave with a mountain of debt, that will take the care and concern of citizens like you.
We've got more work to do. And I spelled out in my Inauguration and I spelled out in my State of the Union exactly what we need to do. We need to continue to build on the tremendous progress we've made in reforming our education system and make sure that every child in America is prepared before they start school with universal pre-K for every kid, which can make an enormous difference in achievement levels all across the country: modernize our high schools so they're adapted to the 21st century; make sure that our community colleges are linking up with businesses to prepare our young people for the jobs of tomorrow; make college more affordable. We know that we need to do that. There's no credible argument for not doing it.
And we know that we've got to have a sensible budget, a budget that invests in education and invests in research and is true to our commitment to keeping our seniors out of poverty and is true to our investment in the infrastructure that's going to continue to make this a growing, dynamic economy. And we can do all that. We don't have to do anything radical. We know what the basic plan is.
They are looking for us for us to show leadership in helping make sure that children around the world aren't dying of malnutrition and that they get a decent education and that people in extreme poverty making less than $2 a day, that they're put in a position in which they can succeed because they understand that if they succeed, then America will succeed as well. And they don't understand exactly sometimes what's holding us back.
So I want to get moving. And any time that the other side is ready and willing and prepared to work on the things that Chuck Schumer has been working on, like immigration and making sure that we're reducing gun violence in this country; any time that somebody is willing to work on the kinds of things that Michael Bennet has been working on, like improving our education system and making sure that we've got world-class research; any time that somebody is willing to cooperate with Nancy Pelosi to make sure that our budget reflects our commitment to not just the folks at the very top, but a broad-based prosperity for all Americans; and that we're making sure that we're rebuilding our manufacturing base in this country—any time those folks want to get to work, we are ready to work.
Now, I see three areas where we need to focus if we're really going to keep the recovery going, but take it to new heights. Number one, we've got to make America a magnet for good jobs. Number two, we've got to make sure that workers are able to get the education and skills they need to do those jobs. Number three, we've got to make sure that, if and when you're working hard, that that leads to a decent living.
And later today I'm going to visit with a program that helps people who have gone through some tough circumstances, especially low-income dads, and this program is now helping them get the training and the guidance they need to find work and support a family. The—which is a priority because—and probably, some of these folks who I'm meeting, they didn't get that early childhood education that put them on the right track. And what we want to do is, first of all, make sure our kids are getting the training they need, but if they missed out early on, we still want to give them opportunity on the backend.
But obviously, the training of kids, giving them good education, training older workers, none of that is going to make a difference if we don't have great companies that are hiring. And that's why I wanted to come to Ellicott.
Wouldn't we be better off if every American could find a good job that pays the bills and lets you afford a home and maybe take a vacation, put some money away to retire? Wouldn't we all be better off if we knew that all of our kids were getting a good education from an earliest age, if we reformed our high schools for this new economy, if we're helping more young people afford to go to college?
Dr. King was just 15 years old when he enrolled here at Morehouse. He was an unknown, undersized, unassuming young freshman who lived at home with his parents. And I think it's fair to say he wasn't the coolest kid on campus; for the suits he wore, his classmates called him Tweed. But his education at Morehouse helped to forge the intellect, the discipline, the compassion, the soul force that would transform America. It was here that he was introduced to the writings of Gandhi and Thoreau and the theory of civil disobedience. It was here that professors encouraged him to look past the world as it was and fight for the world as it should be. And it was here, at Morehouse, as Dr. King later wrote, where "I realized that nobody . . . was afraid."
We know that in this global economy, knowledge and skills and education count for everything and that the biggest bang we can get for our education dollar is if we are investing in early childhood education so that every child is getting a good start when they enter kindergarten. We know that.
And we've got great models all across the country. We know how to do early childhood education well. The problem is, we haven't invested in it. We probably invest less in early childhood education in this country than in any other industrialized country in the world. Same, by the way, goes for infrastructure, which is why not a single airport out of the top 25 in the world are in America.
So the—so thanks to the work of Steve Israel, thanks to incredible candidates like Ann Callis, we've got a great chance of taking back the House. And I'm going to be working tirelessly, wherever I get the opportunity, to make the case to the American people that our ideas are the right ones for growing the middle class, that our ideas are the right ones to protect our environment, that our ideas are the right ones in terms of making sure our kids are getting a great education.
And so across the board—whether it's getting early childhood education done or rebuilding our infrastructure when we've got bridges that are buckling all across the country and airports that aren't working the way they're supposed to and ports that are too small to accommodate the big ships that are going to be coming through the Panama Canal; whether it's making sure that we've got job training for people who have to retrain for the jobs of the future—we have a lot of business to do.
And every day I wake up, I ask three questions: How do I make America a magnet for good jobs? How do we make sure our workers earn the skills and education they need for those jobs? How do we make sure those jobs are paying a decent living? And the answer to that is, government can't do it by itself. Obviously, the private sector is the driver of our economy. It's the engine of our growth.
You should be able to buy a home and send your kids to college and save a little bit for retirement, make sure your kids get a good education, not go bankrupt when you get sick. Most Americans aren't asking for a lot. They know they've got to take care of themselves. They just want to make sure that if they're working hard, they can get ahead. That's the essence of what it means to be a Democrat.
But here's the thing that I think all of us understand: The job of rebuilding America, the job of making sure our kids have a great education, the job of making sure everybody has health care, the job of making sure that financial institutions treat everybody fairly, the job of making sure our veterans have the care that they need, the job of making sure we have a bright energy future, the job of preserving our environment, the job of making sure we stay on the cutting edge when it comes to innovation, that job is not mine alone. I can't do it by myself. I've got to have folks with me who care as passionately about these things as I do. I've got to have folks in the United States Senate who are willing to stand up for working people just like I have. I need folks in the United States Senate who, every day, are waking up thinking about the people who sent them there and trying to figure out how do I make sure that they are getting a brighter future.
Mr. President, youth development is a key focus area for South Africa given that a third of our population is under the age of 15. This is a key feature of our national development plan. Therefore, we welcome our cooperation in education, especially the School Capacity and Innovation Programme, as well as investment in primary education and teacher training. It is also our wish to extend cooperation on vocational training to develop our further education and training colleges.
See, I had just spent a year traveling the State and listening to your stories: of proud Maytag workers losing their jobs when the plant moved down to Mexico—a lot of folks here remember that; of teachers whose salaries weren't keeping up with the rising cost of groceries; of young people who had the drive and the energy, but not the money to afford a college education.
Then, rather than reduce our deficits with a scalpel by cutting out programs we don't need, fixing ones that we do need that maybe are in need of reform, making Government more efficient—instead of doing that—we've got folks who've insisted on leaving in place a meat cleaver called the sequester that's cost jobs. It's harmed growth. It's hurt our military. It's gutted investments in education and science and medical research. Almost every credible economist will tell you it's been a huge drag on this recovery. And it means that we're underinvesting in the things that this country needs to make it a magnet for good jobs.
Or they'll talk about Government assistance for the poor, despite the fact that they've already cut early education for vulnerable kids. They've already cut insurance for people who've lost their jobs through no fault of their own. Or they'll bring up Obamacare—this is tried and true—despite the fact that our businesses have created nearly twice as many jobs in this recovery as businesses had at the same point in the last recovery when there was no Obamacare. So——
And that's why, over the next several weeks, in towns across this country, I will be engaging the American people in this debate. I'll lay out my ideas for how we build on the cornerstones of what it means to be middle class in America and what it takes to work your way into the middle class in America: job security with good wages and durable industries, a good education, a home to call your own, affordable health care when you get sick, a secure retirement even if you're not rich, reducing poverty, reducing inequality, growing opportunity. That's what we need. [Applause] That's what we need. That's what we need right now. That's what we need to be focused on.
The days when the wages for a worker with a high school degree could keep pace with the earnings of somebody who got some sort of higher education, those days are over. Everybody here knows that. There are a whole bunch of folks here whose dads or grandpas worked at a plant, didn't need a high school education. You could just go there. If you were willing to work hard, you might be able to get two jobs. And you could support your family, have a vacation, own your home. But technology and global competition, they're not going away. Those old days aren't coming back.
And that brings me to the second cornerstone of a strong middle class—and everybody here knows it—an education that prepares our children and our workers for the global competition that they're going to face. And if you think education is expensive, wait until you see how much ignorance costs in the 21st century. [Laughter]
And I'm going to take action in the education area to spur innovation that don't require Congress. So today, for example, as we speak, Federal agencies are moving on my plan to connect 99 percent of America's students to high-speed Internet over the next 5 years. We're making that happen right now. We've already begun meeting with business leaders and tech entrepreneurs and innovative educators to identify the best ideas for redesigning our high schools so that they teach the skills required for a high-tech economy.
I'm also going to use the power of my office over the next few months to highlight a topic that's straining the budgets of just about every American family, and that's the soaring cost of higher education. Everybody is touched by this, including your President, who had a whole bunch of loans he had to pay off. [Laughter]
Now, so you've got a good job; you get a good education—those have always been the key stepping stones into the middle class. But a home of your own has always been the clearest expression of middle class security. For most families, that's your biggest asset. For most families, that's where your life's work has been invested. And that changed during the crisis, when we saw millions of middle class families experience their home values plummeting. The good news is, over the past 4 years, we've helped more responsible homeowners stay in their homes. And today, sales are up, and prices are up, and fewer Americans see their homes underwater.
All right. Good job, good education for your kids, home of your own, secure retirement.
Now, finally, as we work to strengthen these cornerstones of middle class security—good job with decent wages and benefits, a good education, home of your own, retirement security, health care security—I'm going to make the case for why we've got to rebuild ladders of opportunity for all those Americans who haven't quite made it yet, who are working hard, but are still suffering poverty wages, who are struggling to get full-time work.
And the problem that we got right now is you've got a portion of Congress who -- whose policies don't just want to, you know, leave things alone; they actually want to accelerate these trends. There is no serious economist out there that would suggest that if you took the Republican agenda of slashing education further, slashing Medicare further, slashing research and development further, slashing investments in infrastructure further, that that would reverse some of these trends of inequality.
The President. Well, it is good to be back in Brooklyn. Good to be in New York City. And it is good to see some friends who stick up for students and teachers and education every day. We've got your Governor; Andrew Cuomo is in the house. Give him a big round of applause. We've got your Senator, Chuck Schumer. Outstanding Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan. We've got a—your outstanding congressional delegation is here. Give them a big round of applause. We've got your Public Advocate and my friend, Bill de Blasio is here. We've got the outstanding leader of one of America's iconic companies, IBM CEO Ginni Rometty. And I want to give a special shout-out to a man who's been an extraordinary mayor for this city; he's been a leader throughout the country for the past 12 years. Mr. Michael Bloomberg is here.
And that all begins with the education that we give young people. Because all of you are growing up in changing times, especially for the economy. The world you're growing up in is different than the one that previous generations here in Brooklyn knew and here—and all across the country knew.
In the old days, a young person, they might have just followed their parents' footsteps and gotten a job in their parents' line of work, keep that job for 30, 40 years. If you were willing to work hard, you didn't necessarily need a great education. If you'd just gone to high school, you might get a job at a factory or in the garment district. Or you might be able to just get a job that allowed you to earn your wages, keep pace with people who had a chance to go to college. But those days are over, and those days are not coming back.
We live in a 21st-century global economy. And in a global economy, jobs can go anywhere. Companies, they're looking for the best educated people, wherever they live, and they'll reward them with good jobs and good pay. And if you don't have a well-educated workforce, you're going to be left behind. If you don't have a good education, then it is going to be hard for you to find a job that pays a living wage.
Here at P-TECH, you've got folks from IBM, City Tech, City University of New York, City Department of Education; everybody is pulling together to make sure a high school education puts young people on a path to a good job. So you guys have opportunities here that you don't find in most high schools yet. You can take college-level courses in math and science. You can work with mentors from IBM so you're learning specific skills that you know leads to a good job. And most important, you'll graduate with a high school diploma and an associate's degree in computer systems or electromechanical engineering. And that means you'll be in demand. Companies will want to hire you. IBM has even said that P-TECH graduates will be first in line when you apply for jobs once you graduate.
And at a moment when the cost of higher education's—keeps going up—and Arne and I are working hard to make sure that we're doing everything we can to reduce the burden of student loans on young people—here's how much 2 years of college will cost P-TECH students and their families: Zero. Nothing. [Applause] Nothing. I noticed some of the parents were the first to clap. They're all, like, "Yes." [Laughter] They like that.
So this is a ticket into the middle class, and it's available to everybody who's willing to work for it. And that's the way it should be. That's what public education is supposed to do. And the great thing is that what started small is now growing. So Governor Cuomo, he's opening up P-TECH model schools in districts throughout the State—[applause]—throughout the State. So all those schools together, they're going to prepare more than 6,000 high school students for good, high-skilled jobs.
So as a country, we should all want what all of you are receiving right now, the same chance for a great education. Here's what I think we should do as a country to make sure they've got the same opportunities you do. First of all, we've got to give every child an earlier start at success by making high-quality preschool available to every 4-year-old in America.
And here's one more thing we should do, and that is just remember, none of this works unless we've got outstanding teachers, which means we've got to make sure that we're funding education so that teachers have the support that they need so that they can support their own families so that they're not having to dig into their pockets for school supplies. And we've got to show them the respect and provide pathways of excellence for teachers so that they're treated like the professionals that they are. It is a hard job, and we've got to make sure we're investing in them.
But a budget is important, because what a budget does is, it sets our priorities. It tells us what we think is important, what our priorities are. And the stakes for our middle class could not be higher. If we don't set the right priorities now, then many of you will be put at a competitive disadvantage compared to other countries. If you think education is expensive, wait until you see how much ignorance costs. So we've got to invest.
So we need a budget that is responsible, that is fiscally prudent, but a budget that cuts what we don't need, closes wasteful tax loopholes that don't create jobs, freeing up resources to invest in the things that actually do help us grow: things like education and scientific research, and infrastructure, roads, bridges, airports. This should not be an ideological exercise. We should use some common sense.
And after the manufactured crisis that Congress—actually, a small group in the House of Representatives just put us through, shutting down the Government and threatening to potentially default on our debt—I don't want to hear the same old stuff about how America can't afford to invest in the things that have always made us strong. Don't tell me we can afford to shut down the Government, which cost our economy billions of dollars, but we can't afford to invest in our education systems. Because there's nothing more important than this.
And we'd be a lot further along without some of the dysfunction and obstruction we've seen in Washington. We would be a lot further along if we could just get folks to act with some sense—[laughter]—if we didn't have one wing of one party that was a little less obsessed with repealing health care for 40 million people, more concerned with making sure the law works. If they hadn't spent 40 votes trying to repeal the Affordable Care Act, they might have actually taken some votes on rebuilding our infrastructure or instituting early childhood education for young people across this country or investing more money in basic research that helps to create the amazing technologies that many of you utilize. Any of the serious proposals I've put forward that would be creating jobs right now, they could have been taking votes on that.
The American people agree with us that jobs, growing the economy should be our number-one priority. And we've got to make some investments to make that happen. And we've got to give a better bargain to the middle class and everybody who is working to join the middle class. And that means building on those cornerstones of what makes for a strong middle class: good jobs, a good education, a home of your own, health care when you get sick, a secure retirement even if you're not rich. So we can help manufacturers bring more jobs back to America by investing in American clean energy technology and putting people to work building roads and bridges and schools and high-speed broadband networks that attract businesses from around the world.
We can prepare our children and our workers for the global competition that they'll face: expanding high-quality preschool education, redesigning our high schools, investing in community colleges and job training, and tackling rising college costs so that young people can afford it. We can help responsible homeowners afford a mortgage or refinancing at today's low rates, help build a rock-solid housing system for decades to come, instead of boom and bust.
And when I think about what I'm fighting for, what gets me up every single day, that captures it as much—just about as much as anything. Kindness, empathy, that sense that I have a stake in your success; that I'm going to make sure, just because Malia and Sasha are doing well, that's not enough, I want your kids to do well also. And I'm willing to help to build good schools so that they get a great education, even if mine are already getting a great education.
Now, as President, I'm committed to making Washington work better and rebuilding the trust of the people who sent us here. And I believe most of you are too. Last month, thanks to the work of Democrats and Republicans, Congress finally produced a budget that undoes some of last year's severe cuts to priorities like education. Nobody got everything they wanted, and we can still do more to invest in this country's future while bringing down our deficit in a balanced way, but the budget compromise should leave us freer to focus on creating new jobs, not creating new crises.
Taking a page from that playbook, the White House just organized a College Opportunity Summit, where already, 150 universities, businesses, nonprofits have made concrete commitments to reduce inequality in access to higher education and to help every hard-working kid go to college and succeed when they get to campus. And across the country, we're partnering with mayors, Governors, and State legislatures on issues from homelessness to marriage equality.
Of course, it's not enough to train today's workforce. We also have to prepare tomorrow's workforce, by guaranteeing every child access to a world-class education. Estiven Rodriguez couldn't speak a word of English when he moved to New York City at age 9. But last month, thanks to the support of great teachers and an innovative tutoring program, he led a march of his classmates through a crowd of cheering parents and neighbors from their high school to the post office, where they mailed off their college applications. And this son of a factory worker just found out, he's going to college this fall.
Research shows that one of the best investments we can make in a child's life is high-quality early education. Last year, I asked this Congress to help States make high-quality pre-K available to every 4-year-old. And as a parent as well as a President, I repeat that request tonight. But in the meantime, 30 States have raised pre-K funding on their own. They know we can't wait. So just as we worked with States to reform our schools, this year, we'll invest in new partnerships with States and communities across the country in a Race to the Top for our youngest children. And as Congress decides what it's going to do, I'm going to pull together a coalition of elected officials, business leaders, and philanthropists willing to help more kids access the high-quality pre-K that they need. It is right for America. We need to get this done.
We're working to redesign high schools and partner them with colleges and employers that offer the real-world education and hands-on training that can lead directly to a job and career. We're shaking up our system of higher education to give parents more information and colleges more incentive to offer better value so that no middle class kid is priced out of a college education.
Our alliance with Europe remains the strongest the world has ever known. From Tunisia to Burma, we're supporting those who are willing to do the hard work of building democracy. In Ukraine, we stand for the principle that all people have the right to express themselves freely and peacefully and to have a say in their country's future. Across Africa, we're bringing together businesses and governments to double access to electricity and help end extreme poverty. In the Americas, we're building new ties of commerce, but we're also expanding cultural and educational exchanges among young people. And we will continue to focus on the Asia-Pacific, where we support our allies, shape a future of greater security and prosperity, and extend a hand to those devastated by disaster, as we did in the Philippines, when our Marines and civilians rushed to aid those battered by a typhoon, and who were greeted with words like, "We will never forget your kindness" and "God bless America."
One-third of Americans who have applied for an education loan this year also happen to use Tumblr, so last week we asked our audience if they had questions that they'd like to ask the President about the cost value and accessibility of higher education. And turns out, they had quite a few. We're not going to be able to get through all of them today, but the President has been kind enough to give us some time at his house to answer some of those questions. [Laughter]
Mr. Karp. "It wasn't until after I graduated college that I realized what I wanted to do with my life. Now I have a degree that has very little to do with that goal and a mountain of debt. I can't help but wonder if I wasn't pressured to go to college and was better prepared to make that decision—and if I was better prepared to make that decision, that I might be in a better place to pursue my dreams today. How can we change the public education system to better prepare and support young people making this huge decision?" I mean, again, teenagers deciding what they want to do for the rest of their lives.
So a great liberal arts humanities education is still critically important, because in today's global economy, one of the most important skills you have is your ability to work with people and communicate clearly and effectively. Having said that, what is also true is that technology is going to continue to drive innovation. And just to be a good citizen, you need some background in STEM, and we are not producing enough engineers, enough computer scientists, enough math teachers and science teachers, and enough researchers.
Mr. Karp. Well, what you just described is really hard to navigate, the—again, a teenager making the decision between passion or an industry that's going to have demand for them. So great question: "At this point, I'm stuck between majors. I know the field I have a passion for has a limited number of jobs, all of which pay very little. Assuming I get the job, the low income will make it difficult to pay the substantial debt I'll most likely be in from that education. Are there other fields—excuse me—there are other fields I know I could succeed in and receive the higher salary, but I'm afraid that one day I'll realize I hate what I do."
And so I think it's good for young people—not only good—it's imperative for young people to be good consumers of education, and don't just assume that there's one way of doing things.
We tell our daughters—Malia is now—she'll be 16 next month, and she's going to be in the college process. And we tell her, don't assume that there are 10 schools that you have to go to, and if you didn't go to those 10, that somehow things are going to be terrible. There are a lot of schools out there. There are a lot of options. And you should do your research before you decide to exercise one of those options. Having said that, the overwhelming evidence is that a college education is the surest, clearest path into the middle class for most Americans.
Now, there's some controversy, I want to confess, about—that a lot of colleges and universities say, you know, if you start ranking just based on cost and employability, et cetera, you're missing the essence of higher education and so forth. What we're really trying to do is just identify here are some good bargains, here are some really bad deals. Then there's going to be a bunch of schools in the middle that there's not going to be a huge amount of differentiation. But what we are trying to do is make sure that students have some—enough information going into it that they don't end up in a school that is pretty notorious for piling a lot of debt on their students, but not really delivering a great education.
Mr Karp. ——or you are already today facing that debt. What's the best way, though, for people who are—again, they're thinking about higher education, they're in school today—Emma askeed a thoughtful question: "What is the best way for students to have a voice in their own education?" So much education today, I think, really—I don't know, I mean, so many teenagers who feel like education is happening to them. They're going through the motions. They know that this is what they're supposed to do, and so they follow along. How do we make sure kids are driving?
The President. Well, look, at some point it's going to be up to the young person to drive that education. It's not inevitable that you just fasten your seatbelt and just go on a ride for 4 years or 2 years or whatever it is. I mean, I have to say that in my own college experience, I think the first 2 years I was there thinking, I'm just happy to be here and I'm having fun and I'll just sort of go through the motions. My last 2 years was when I really became much more serious about what I was doing and much more intentional about what I was doing.
So—but I think that part of what we as adults have to do goes back to what I said about high schools. Education is not a passive thing. You don't tip your head and somebody pours it into your ear. It is an active process of you figuring out the world and your place in it. And the earlier we can help young people—not lock them in. Look, nobody expects that somebody who is 16 automatically knows exactly what they want to do, and their—people may change their minds repeatedly. But what we can do is expose young people to enough actual work and occupations that they start getting a feel for what they would be interested in. And I really want to work with more school districts, and I've asked Secretary of Education Arne Duncan to work with more school districts, and we're actually giving grants to school districts that are thinking creatively about how high school can be used more effectively. I don't want a young person who knows that they want to go into the trades to just waste 4 years of high school, and then they've got to go through 2 years of apprenticeship and classwork before they become a contractor. I'd rather have them doing contracting while also getting some other educational exposure so that they're getting a jump on the things that they want to do. And they can save a lot of money in the process.
We do have to do a better job of giving young people who are interested an effective vocational education. And there are tons of opportunities out there for people—here's an interesting statistic: The average trade person in Wisconsin—and what I mean by that is an electrician, a plumber, a carpenter, a machine tool worker—the average age in Wisconsin is 59 years old, right? Now, these jobs typically pay 25, 30 bucks an hour, potentially, with benefits. You can make a really good living doing that, and there are a lot of folks who love doing it. It's really interesting work and highly skilled work.
It looks like we have time for one more question, so let's switch over to a lighter one. There are plenty of young people out there today who are watching your career incredibly closely. They're thinking about their futures, their careers, their educations that they're going off to pursue. Astonishment asked, "Where do you see yourself in 10 years?" [Laughter]
The President. Well, I haven't projected out 10 years. I'm really focused on making sure that I make every day in the next 2½ years count, because it's an incredible privilege to be in this office. And even when I'm frustrated with Congress or I'm frustrated with the press and how it's reporting things and Washington generally, I also know that there's something I can do every single day that's helping somebody and that, sometimes without a lot of fanfare, we're making it easier for a business to get a loan and we're making it easier for a young person to get an education and we're making it easier for a family to get health care and making sure that each day I come away with something that we've done to make it a little easier for folks to work their way into the middle class, to stay in the middle class, to save for retirement, to finance their kids' college educations—that's a good day for me.
The President. Study-abroad program. Generally, study abroad-programs are coordinated by the universities and colleges that sponsor them. There should be interaction between those educational institutions and the State Department. There are obviously some countries that are particularly dangerous, and in those cases, I think making sure that everybody has good information going in is important.
The President. Okay. Well, look, this is something we've been spending a lot of time on. There are a couple components to the problem. And by the way, this is something near and dear to my heart because I was not born into a wealthy family. I'm only here because of my education, but the reason I was able to get that education was because grants, loans, work during the summer—all those things allowed me to pay the bills.
But college costs were lower then, when I was going to school. I know you can't tell from my gray hair, but I'm getting a little older now. [Laughter] And I—so I started college in 1979, and when I graduated—I was able to get a 4-year college education—I had some debt, but I could pay it off after 1 year. Now the average student that does have debt is seeing $30,000 worth of debt. And even if they're able to take out loans, that's a burden that they're carrying with them in their first job. It may prevent them from buying their first home. If they've got a business idea, that's money that is going to take them a while before they're able to start a business, and as a consequence, it affects the whole economy.
Now, it is really important just to remind everybody, a college education is still a great investment as long as you graduate. As long as you graduate. So when you go into college, you've got to be determined, "I'm going to graduate." It's a great investment, but it's not a great investment if you take out $20,0000 worth of debt and you don't graduate, and you don't get the degree, which is why we're spending a lot of time talking to colleges about what are you doing to retain students.
In terms of the higher education reauthorization act, that's a big bill, there's a lot of complexities to it. I will just focus on an area that I think should be the focus—and we've already talked about—and that is student loan costs and how we can hold schools more accountable for informing young people, as they're starting their education, what exactly it's going to mean for them.
But as I said before—this is true for education generally—the Federal Government can help, but States and local governments have to do their part as well. In public education, the Federal Government accounts for about 7 percent of total costs. The rest of it comes from State and local taxes. And what we've tried to do is leverage the little bit of money that the Federal Government gives to this to modify how—to incentivize reform and to get folks to experiment with new ways of learning.
All of that, we hope, can get embodied in the Higher Education Act. I will tell you, sometimes if I'm for it, then the other side is against it, even if originally it was their idea. So I can't guarantee you that we'll get bipartisan support for these ideas, but it—there's nothing that should prevent us from doing it because this is just about making a college education a better value for families. And that's something that should transcend party; it shouldn't be a Democrat or a Republican issue. Okay?
We've been able to stabilize it, but when we go into the budget talks with Republicans next year, we may go through some of the same problems, in part because the other side has said they want to cut funding for education; they've said that they want to cut support for vulnerable families; they want to cut Medicaid, which would have an impact on the elderly and families that have folks with disabilities. And I've said no.
I've said why would I—by the way, the deficit has come down by more than half since I came into office. It hasn't gone up. Federal spending has not gone up. The deficit has gone down. And if we want to do more to reduce the deficit further, why am I going to take it out on the most vulnerable in our society and programs we need to grow when we've got a tax system where you've got corporations taking advantage of loopholes—in some cases, they're paying no taxes, when a teacher or a secretary are paying taxes themselves? Why wouldn't I close those loopholes first to generate additional revenues before I started cutting education spending or spending on basic research?
But despite all that, we're making progress. Despite all that, some folks have health care that didn't have it before. Despite all that, some students are able to afford their education better. Despite all that, some folks have jobs that didn't have it. Despite all that, the Green Line got built here in Minnesota. Despite all that, we can make life a little better for American families who are doing their best, working hard, meeting their responsibilities.
That's why I wanted to come here to Columbia and here to Benedict College, because we all know we still have work to do. We've got to ensure not just the absence of formal, legal oppression, but the presence of an active, dynamic opportunity: good jobs that pay good wages, a good start for every child, health care for every family, a higher education that prepares you for the world without crippling you with debt, a fairer and more just legal and criminal justice system.
The President. Well, let me—first of all, let me just say, this is a cause near and dear to my heart because Michelle and I, we weren't born into wealthy families, so the only way we got our education was because we got help: loans, grants, work-study programs. If we hadn't had that available to us, we could not have pursued the education we did and couldn't have achieved what we achieved.
So far, at least, I haven't gotten the kind of support I'd like from some of my Republican friends in the Senate and House of Representatives. But we're going to keep on working on it because it's a smart idea. Look, I want ultimately—ultimately, I want at least the first 2 years of college to be just like public high schools are now. And everybody—because you—it is very hard nowadays to find a well-paying job without some form of higher education—without some form of higher education.
The opportunities for you to get information and to get an education and expose yourself to the entire world because of technology is unmatched. It's never been like this before. Your ability to start your own business or carve your own path has never been greater. So my first and general point is do not get cynical about what's possible.
So there are no excuses not to put in the effort. There are no excuses not to hit the books. If you want a good education in this country, you can get a good education, even if you are in a bad school. And I'll be honest with you, we've got to do some work to make schools more equal. Right here in South Carolina, there are still schools that were built back in the 1800s that haven't been repaired and don't have decent restrooms and don't have proper books.
So we've still got to fight to make sure that every child, not just some, have equal opportunity. That's a worthy fight. But you can still learn even in that school. Even in the most rundown school, if you're putting in the effort, you can get a good education. So you can't make excuses. Even as you advocate for justice, you've got to make sure that you're also taking advantage of the opportunities that you currently have.
The President. Well, first of all, City Year, AmeriCorps—for those young people who are thinking about public service or want to serve before they go on to graduate school or, in some cases, want to get involved before they go to college, AmeriCorps programs are an outstanding way to help fund your college education.
So none of us can afford to take the day off. And I want you to have every chance, every tool you need to make this world better. So today I'm announcing nearly $70 million in U.S. investments in education, training, and employment programs for our young people throughout Latin America and the Caribbean. And these investments will help young people in unemployed and impoverished and marginalized communities and give them a chance to gain the skills they need to compete and succeed in the 21st-century economy.
What deters people from investing in most countries is conflict, corruption, and a lack of skills or infrastructure. And those countries that are able to address those problems—have rule of law and eliminate corruption; make sure that you are investing in the education of your people, and it's a continuous education, it doesn't just stop at the lower grades, but you give people constant opportunities to upgrade their skills; you have a decent infrastructure—you're going to be able to succeed. That's the recipe, the formula for a 21st-century economy.
Now, with respect to Chinese investment in the Caribbean or in the Americas, in the Western Hemisphere, my response is the same one that I gave when I was asked this question in Africa, which is, if China is making investments that are building up infrastructure or improving education or helping the people, then we welcome that. We think that's great. The only thing is, you got to make sure you look at what strings may be attached. If the investments are made and it's solely to build a road to a mine to extract raw materials that are going to then be immediately going to a port and shipped to China, and if Chinese workers are shipped in to build the road, and if you don't know exactly what the deal was with the Government that led to China getting the contract, in those situations, it may not be in fact serving the long-term interests of the country.
Number three is providing alternative paths for young people. If a young person is reading by the age—by the third grade at grade level, if they are enjoying school, if they see a path for success, then they are less likely to get involved in criminal activity, and that will reduce gun violence, and that will reduce crime, and that will reduce death. Which means investing in things like early childhood education and improving our schools, those things are absolutely vital.
Spending money just for the sake of money—spending money is not—that's not the formula for success. But if the money is being spent on what we talked about—early childhood education, if it's being spent on infrastructure, if it's being spent on research, if it's being spent on building skills for workers—those are good investments. And I do think that the international financial institutions have to accommodate the interests of countries who have a sound plan for growth so that they can not just stay in this static state, but can, over time, thrive and succeed. And the way that's going to happen is because of outstanding young leaders like you.
We're working with many of you to help working families earn higher wages down the road with skills and education they need. Seattle, a city with a Democratic mayor, Ed Murray, just passed universal pre-K. Indianapolis, a city with a Republican mayor, Greg Ballard, is starting citywide preschool scholarships. Thirty-four States have increased funding for preschool as well, which means even more young people getting the early enrichment that can pay off over a lifetime.
So these are just a few of the examples of the work that's being done. And I'd name every single way that we're working together to open new doors of opportunity for the American people, but we'd be here all day. So here is the bottom line. On America's most important economic priorities—from supporting working families to improving education, to creating good new jobs, to getting people to those new jobs, to improving affordable housing, to dealing with homelessness—cities are not standing still. You are moving forward.
The President. Well you know, as a rule I don't count it on the stock market going up and down, that's the nature of these markets. I think its more important to look at the long term trend lines that we've seen. I mean we've had more than five years now of private sector job growth every single month, over 13 million jobs created. And, you know, the American economy has actually proved to be more resilient, come back faster better, stronger than any of the advanced countries around the world, whether it's Europe, China, Japan. And I think that's a testimony to some good decisions that we've made, but in order to continue that progress, it's important that Congress doesn't stand in the way. And there are a couple things they are gonna need to do to continue economic progress. Number one, make sure that we pass a budget without shutting down the government, making sure that we don't have mindless cuts to critical areas like infrastructure and education, not screwing around with the debt limit like they did a couple years ago that caused all kinds of chaos and panic. As long as we stay focused on our fundamentals, doing what we know works, then the American economy will continue to grow will continue to improve. And then we've got to make sure that our workers, our people, our children are trained for those jobs in the future and that's why education, job training, things like that are so important and why we can't neglect those investments either.

So I'm going to spend every day that I have left in this office fighting to restore that dream so that everyone who works hard can get ahead. And, yes, that includes immigration reform. But that's not all that we've got to do. We've got to keep creating good jobs. We've got to make sure every family feels our country's recovery in their own lives, and that includes the families in Puerto Rico. We've got to make 2 years of college as free and universal as high school is today. We've got to stop spending billions of taxpayer dollars keeping nonviolent drug offenders behind bars and give them a chance to get right and back on the right track. We've got to make sure that every child gets a world-class education from an earliest age, that every person who's still uninsured gets covered, that every school and every street is safe from the madness of gun violence.
But part of it also has to do with the fact that there is a fundamental decision we have to make as a country in terms of our values: What do we believe, what do we care about? I believe that this country works best not when we're only thinking about ourselves, but when we're thinking about others. I believe that our economy grows best when folks at the top are not the only ones doing well, but that everybody is participating in growth and everybody has got a shot and everybody is getting an education, everybody has a chance to work hard to achieve the American Dream.
I believe that we've got to make an investment in our futures, that rather than a pipeline from underfunded schools to prisons, that we should be investing in early childhood education, and we should be investing in after-school programs. And we should be investing in making sure that the best teachers are able to thrive in classrooms that are properly equipped and properly financed; and that we should make sure that everybody can go to college, not just folks who were born in the right ZIP Code, not just people who happen to have parents who had also gone to college. We want everybody educated. And when they are, we all benefit, not just those young people, but everybody.
And that remains true. We've got to have, all of us, the kind of effort and sense of purpose to make sure that we're electing people who care about climate change, that we're electing people who want to invest in early childhood education and not just build more prisons. We've got to have the same sense of urgency about making sure that not just our kids can afford to go to college, but that kid on the other side of the tracks is able to go to college. And we can make it happen. But it requires us to feel it and work for it.
Now, the good news is, the COPS program and other programs that your departments rely on to do your jobs may get some relief from the harmful spending cuts that Congress imposed a couple of years ago, because last night Democrats and Republicans in Congress came together around a long-term budget agreement. I'm pretty happy about that because it reflects our values, growing the economy and the middle class by investing in the things like education and job training that are needed, and it keeps us safe by investing in our national security. It's paid for responsibly, in part with a measure to make sure hedge funds and private equity firms pay what they owe in taxes just like everybody else. It's the right thing to do.
At the same time, too often, law enforcement gets scapegoated for the broader failures of our society and our criminal justice system. And I know you do your jobs with distinction no matter the challenges you face. That's part of wearing a badge. But we can't expect you to contain and control problems that the rest of us aren't willing to face or do anything about: problems ranging from substandard education to a shortage of jobs and opportunity, an absence of drug treatment programs, and laws that result in it being easier in too many neighborhoods for a young person to purchase a gun than a book.
One study found that every dollar we invest in pre-K—in universal pre-K, early childhood education—we save at least twice that down the road in reduced crime. Getting a teenager a job for the summer may cost some money, but it costs a fraction of what it will cost to lock him up for 15 years. It's not enough to tell our young people that crime doesn't pay if they have no prospects at all. We've got to make sure they grow up knowing that hard work and responsibility pay off and that they've got other paths available to them.
Police officers see the toll that gun violence takes on our communities, not just when there's a mass shooting, but every single day. If you go to the South Side of Chicago or the West Side of Chicago and you walk around neighborhoods that now have big problems with violent crime and homicide and you talk to the folks who have lived there for a long time and they ask you what's changed, some of it they'll talk about in terms of, well, there used to be more jobs here; people could go over to the factory even if they didn't have a great education, could make a decent living; households were more intact. But a lot of what they'll say is, you know, it used to be if a kid or a group of kids was misbehaving, adults could say something to them. And now folks don't because you don't know if they're armed. [Applause] You don't know if they're armed.
Number one, my administration is announcing new grants to help returning citizens seize that second chance through education and job training and housing and legal help and children's services. So the—[applause]. Five cities are announcing commitments of their own to help folks reentering society to train for high-tech jobs. And we're going to be partnering with them and others to try to make sure that the good work that we saw here today we can start expanding. All right, so that's point number one, putting some more money in the system. Let me say, it's nowhere near what we need, but it gives us more ability to create more programs that serve as an example of best practices so it can be duplicated around the country. That's point number one.
We've still got to work—our work cut out for us to fix a broken immigration system. At a time when we've got so many people playing on anti-immigrant fears, we've got to remind people that this is a nation of immigrants. That's how this country got built. And by the way, those immigrants were from everywhere. I was—there was a beautiful—I'm trying to remember what magazine I saw it, but they had a picture of immigrants from Ellis Island. And this was from the 1800s, early 1900s, and you had folks from Sweden and Bulgaria, and they were all in their native outfits. And the—they didn't look like—they did not look as if they had just hopped off a jet and were all spruced up. I mean, they were strivers, but they were escaping poverty and in search of a better life. And a lot of them didn't have great educations, but they knew that if they were able to get here, that their kids would have a great education.
There are a whole bunch of other answers that are just as important when it comes to making sure that the streets of places like Chicago and Baltimore are safer, making sure kids get a good early childhood education, making sure that we're teaching conflict resolution that doesn't involve violence, making sure that faith communities are able to reach out to young people and intervene in timely ways.
The President. Excuse me—Trey. When I see you, I think about my own youth, because I wasn't that different from you. Probably not as articulate and maybe more of a goof-off. But the main difference was, I lived in a more forgiving environment. If I screwed up, I wasn't at risk of getting shot. I'd get a second chance. There were a bunch of folks who were looking out for me, and there weren't a lot of guns on the streets. And that's how all kids should be growing up, wherever they live. I mean, my main advice to you is to continue to be an outstanding role model for the young ones who are coming up behind you. Keep listening to your mom. Work hard and get an education. Understand that high school and whatever peer pressure or restrictions you're under right now won't matter by the time you're a full adult and what matters is your future. But what I also want to say to you is, is that you're really important to the future of this country.
Accidental shootings are also deaths we want to prevent. And we're not going to prevent all of them. But we can do better. We're not going to, through this initiative alone, solve all the problems of inner-city crime. Some of that, as I said, has to do with investing in these communities and making sure there's good education and jobs and opportunity and great parents. And moral responsibility and ethical behavior and instilling that in our kids, that's going to be important.
We live in a time of extraordinary change, change that's reshaping the way we live, the way we work, our planet, our place in the world. It's change that promises amazing medical breakthroughs, but also economic disruptions that strain working families. It promises this education for girls in the most remote villages, but also connects terrorists plotting an ocean away. It's change that can broaden opportunity or widen inequality. And whether we like it or not, the pace of this change will only accelerate.
We agree that real opportunity requires every American to get the education and training they need to land a good-paying job. The bipartisan reform of No Child Left Behind was an important start, and together, we've increased early childhood education, lifted high school graduation rates to new highs, boosted graduates in fields like engineering. In the coming years, we should build on that progress, by providing pre-K for all and offering every student the hands-on computer science and math classes that make them job-ready on day one. We should recruit and support more great teachers for our kids.
But a great education isn't all we need in this new economy. We also need benefits and protections that provide a basic measure of security. It's not too much of a stretch to say that some of the only people in America who are going to work the same job, in the same place, with a health and retirement package for 30 years are sitting in this Chamber. [Laughter] For everyone else, especially folks in their forties and fifties, saving for retirement or bouncing back from job loss has gotten a lot tougher. Americans understand that at some point in their careers, in this new economy, they may have to retool, they may have to retrain. But they shouldn't lose what they've already worked so hard to build in the process.
And that's made people suspicious about trade and understandably so. On the one hand, people benefit from low prices and low inflation. And the degree to which globalization has given people access to more products at lower prices than ever before, that's something that people maybe take for granted. But what they see very directly oftentimes around trade is, this plant closed; you used to be able to walk in, even without a college education, get a job. If you worked hard, you'd have a middle class life and benefits and health care and could take care of your family. And now those jobs have contracted.
So what you'll see reflected, I think, in the budget that I present is, we have stabilized what we're adding to it each year in terms of discretionary spending, taxes, revenue, income, and—but what we're going to have to tackle long term is health care spending. And if we don't do that, then—we can cut food stamps, and we can cut WIC programs, and we can cut education programs, and you can cut out Head Start, you can cut out every single discretionary program that Democrats support and a lot of Governors—Republican Governors support, but sometimes, Members of Congress say are a waste or big government or what have you. You can get rid of all that discretionary spending. It won't matter. Because the big-ticket item is Medicare, Medicaid. And in the private sector, the big-ticket item, that's where the inflation is, is on the health care side.
You add all those things together, and people then start feeling more stressed. Now, the answer to that is how do we get wages up? How do we make sure that you can save for retirement? How can you make sure that your kid can afford to get a higher education to compete for the jobs of the future? And the question then is, what is actually going to get that done?
Ms. Ifill. Well, you mentioned education, you touched on education. We have a question here about that. What's your name?
The—well, first of all, let me just say that I am—I have been emphasizing STEM education—that's science, technology, engineering, and math—not because I think the humanities are unimportant, but because we generally are—have not been producing as many engineers and as many scientists as—and people with those kinds of technological skills as compared to China, for example. And we send a lot of people into banking and folks like me, who become lawyers, but the truth of the matter is, is that we have to make sure that we continue to have a strong base in the sciences and engineering if we're going to remain the most innovative economy in the world. But as somebody who studied humanities himself, I think it's extremely important as well.
The broader issue of financing education, as I mentioned, the reason that college is so much more expensive for this generation as it was for my generation, and even better for the previous generation, really had to do with government spending. It used to be that most State universities were heavily subsidized by the State so they kept tuition really, really low.
What happened around the eighties, nineties was, State legislators started saying, we've got to build more prisons. In fairness to them, they also started feeling more pressure because of Medicaid spending, because health care costs were going up. And so they started cutting higher education budgets, and they made up for it with higher tuition. And that's why, at least at public colleges and universities, the costs have gone up a lot.
And for some people who decide they don't need a 4-year college education—they want to be a graphic designer, they want to go into a trade—now they can get the training they need without incurring any debt. So these are all proposals that are—we know work. There are some States and cities that are already doing this to—free community college proposal, and it's working, and it's really helping to reduce costs.
Where was I? Together, we've increased early childhood education and lifted high school graduation rates to new highs and boosted graduations in fields like engineering. And we could not have done it without the record investment Jay Inslee made in early learning and all-day kindergarten and smaller class sizes and reducing the cost of college tuition for more young people and respecting teachers for being the outstanding professionals that they are. I love teachers too.
The fact is, working families of all races, of all backgrounds deserve higher wages. Families of all ethnicities and all religious faiths deserve quality health care and decent retirement savings. Every child in this country deserves an education that lets them dream bigger than their immediate circumstances. And if we're going to transform our politics to make them responsive to working families, we've got to reject a politics that pits working Americans against one another. We are stronger together, and we've got to fight together to give everybody a fair shot at opportunity and security. That's what we believe. That's what we stand for.
Together, we've got to better prepare our children and our workers for the high-tech, high-wage jobs of tomorrow. We know that early childhood education works. And when childcare costs take a huge share of the family's budget, we should be investing in smart ways to do it across the country. We know how to make college more affordable. Democratic Governors like Jay Inslee are doing good work on these issues right now. But he's got to have 4 more years to get the job done. That's the choice in this election.
We've all witnessed the work she's done to advance the lives of women and girls around the globe. She has been working on this since she was a young woman working at the Children's Defense Fund. She's not late to the game at this. She's been going door to door to make sure kids got a fair share, making sure kids with disabilities could get a quality education. She's been fighting those fights, and she's got the scars to prove it.
So you can choose a path that divides us with harsh rhetoric and pits working people against each other, all the while pushing policies that will just help folks at the top do even better. But that's not helping working families. Or we can transform our politics so they're responsive to working families, so that all people of all races and all backgrounds get a higher wage and all folks get quality health care and a decent retirement and all children in this country get a better education that lets them dream bigger than their circumstances. That's what Hillary Clinton believes. And that's why I'm supporting her for President of the United States. And that's why you should too.
So tonight I'm here to tell you that, yes, we've still got more work to do. More work to do for every American still in need of a good job or a raise, paid leave or a decent retirement; for every child who needs a sturdier ladder out of poverty or a world-class education; for everyone who has not yet felt the progress of these past 7½ years. We need to keep making our streets safer and our criminal justice system fairer, our homeland more secure, our world more peaceful and sustainable for the next generation. We're not done perfecting our Union or living up to our founding creed that all of us are created equal, all of us are free in the eyes of God.
Hillary has still got the tenacity that she had as a young woman, working at the Children's Defense Fund, going door to door to ultimately make sure kids with disabilities could get a quality education.
And that's why the Cavs have always given back to their fans and the community that's been so loyal to them. Over the last 22 years, they've given more than $23 million to local charities. And more than just the money: players and coaches have made about 200 visits annually to schools, hospitals, food kitchens, and more, including assisting educational programs that reach more than 100,000 kids in Northeast Ohio.

She's also traveled the world to boost education and empowerment for women. And as a Blue Star mom, her work with Michelle to honor our military families will go down in history as one of the most lasting and powerful efforts of this administration.

But what I do have confidence in is that we've made good decisions, that we've applied sound judgment to some very difficult situations and that if we stay on a path where we are working hard, maintaining a sense of possibility for the future -- we're willing not to defer tough decisions around health care or energy or education, so that somebody else deals with them -- that America will be strong again.
We've got an education system that's starting to lag behind. And we've got a financial regulatory system that is completely inadequate to control the excessive risks and irresponsible behavior of financial players all around the world. At some point, we've got to take those on.
The President: That -- that is part of the advice I think that was given last year to me. Was, look, Washington is too polarized, it's too hard, the special interests are too powerful. You can't get a health care bill through because the insurance companies will spend millions of dollars of advertising against it; you can't do energy because big oil is going to be opposed; you can't try to solve the education system because whether it's the teachers' unions or this group or that group, they're going to be disenchanted and you're just going to make your own base angry. I mean, on each of these issues, the conventional political wisdom is don't take it on. Because when you take it on, it gets ugly, people get mad, there's a lot of distortions in the system, and your poll numbers will go down.
That also means, by the way, that we can spread out what we do so it's not so cram packed. It doesn't mean I back off the agenda of health care, or energy, or education, or financial regulatory reform, or dealing with our deficits. But it does mean that it doesn't have to be all on top of the other piled on. And we've got a lot more time to explain to people why we're doing what we're doing. We have a lot more time to answer critics who argue that we're not doing the right thing.
Steve Grove: Well, you know, to get good jobs, I think many Americans realize they need a higher education.
And the last point I would make: Colleges and universities also, though, have to figure out how can they cut their costs. Because even if we're putting more and more loans in -- more and more money for loans, if the inflation in higher education keeps on skyrocketing, over time it's still going to gobble up all that extra money, and we'll be right back where we started. So we've got to show more restraint at the college and university level in terms of ever- escalating costs.
Steve Grove: Well, let's back up a bit just from the specifics of education policy, and ask a more fundamental question, which comes from Sean (sp) in Ohio.
Q: [From video.] Mr. President, what do you want public education to help students become? Should they be good workers, innovative thinkers, something else? As a math teacher, I want to know what you think it means to be an educated person.
The President: Well, I think obviously there's a huge economic component to being well educated. We know that if you've got a college education, you're going to make multiples of what you would make as a high school graduate, much less a high school dropout, over the course of lifetime.
But its absolutely true that a high-quality education is not just a matter of being a good worker, it's also a matter of being a good citizen, it's also a matter of being able to think critically, evaluate the world around you, make sure that you can process all the information that's coming at us in a way that helps you make decisions about your own life, but also helps you participate in the life of the country.
And so we're now in a situation in which the economy is growing, moving, and we're reforming areas like education, we're taking steps on energy. We're doing a whole bunch of things out there that are going to create the foundation for long-term economic growth.
We can go back to all the same policies that got us into this mess, where we basically provide special-interest loopholes; we don't regulate Wall Street; we have a health-care system that is out of control; we provide tax cuts who don't need them and weren't asking for them. Or we can take the approach that I've taken since I came in and that I campaigned on, which is to make sure that we start investing in our education system, to make sure that we're investing in clean energy, to get control of health-care costs, to deal with our structural deficit, the fact that we're spending more money through entitlements and through a whole range of other things than we're taking in. Those structural challenges have to be fixed. And it's hard, because you don't see immediate gratification.
THE PRESIDENT: You know, let me say this, Piolín. You know, 'cause a lot of people say this to me, they say, oh, you know, you have a really hard job. You know, you have all these problems, everybody expects you to solve them right away, people are criticizing you and I say, you know what? The problems that I have are not nothing compared to the problems that people have every day if their losing their job, they may lose their mortgage, they're trying to figure out how to finance their kids' college education. This is a great privilege for me to be president and to be able to help people as much as I can and I get frustrated that we're not moving as quickly as I'd like. I'm not getting as much cooperation sometimes as I want in Congress, but I feel confident that we're making progress. I'll just give you one example. You know, we were able, because of the work that we did, to change how we finance the Student Loan Program to take tens of billions of dollars that used to go to the banks that are now going to Pell Grants and student loans. Millions of children, a lot of young Latino students, are now getting scholarships and grants that didn't get it before and are able to aspire to college. When you get something like that done, you feel good in the morning when you wake up because you know, okay, I still have a long check list of things I have to do, but at least we're making a difference right now.
But having said all that, we have made a lot of progress over the last 18 months that, from a historical perspective, you know, ranks up there with any legislative session we've seen in history. And we're going to have to continue to make some progress on things like energy, which didn't get done, on immigration reform, that did not get done. And most importantly we've just got to do a lot more work in terms of generating the kind of jobs that ensure we've got a growing middle class and that people are able to live out the American dream, because right now I think there are a lot of folks who are worried that if we don't make serious investments in education, in energy, in infrastructure, in research and development, that we're going to start falling behind. [applause]
The same is true on potentially reducing our debt and our deficit. Everybody agrees that we have to get control of our deficits. I think us working together, Democrats and Republicans, with a responsible plan that makes sure that we're protecting those core investments like education, that help improve economic growth long term, but also eliminating wasteful spending, is something where we should be able to get some agreement.
SMERCONISH: In a word, what I hear from listeners on a day- to-day basis is, angst. And you talk about the American dream. I was raised to believe that, of course, if I worked hard and had a good education, I would further those achievements of my folks. What I hear from people is a concern that that's no longer the case. They're fearful that their own children will continue to exceed their own opportunities.
So middle-class families have every right to be frustrated and concerned. And the answer is going to be making sure that we are doing what we've always done best, which is innovate, have a dynamic private sector that is investing in new plants and new equipment and hiring new workers. We've got to have a government that is lean and mean, but also making important investments that foster long-term growth. I already mentioned infrastructure. Making sure that we've got the best education system in the world.
We used to be ranked number one in the proportion of college graduates. We now rank ninth. We now rank 21st and 25th, respectively, in our math and science education. Those are all critical changes that need to be addressed. And we have begun addressing them over the last two years.
So for example, we took away tens of billions of dollars that were going in the form of unwarranted subsidies to banks, and we've made sure that that money was going into making student loan programs cheaper so that more people have access to college educations. That's going to be critical for our long-term growth.
I will say, this is an example of the choice that we confront in this election, because my colleagues on the Republican side right now have said that they want tax cuts for the top 2 percent, the wealthiest Americans. And that would cost $700 billion, and they have no way of paying for it. But part of the way that they're suggesting to pay for it is to potentially cut education by 20 percent. That's not a smart way for us to get our debt and deficits under control. We don't want to undermine those things that help us grow over the long term.
And you know, we should be clear and strong about the steps we took to save this country from a second Great Depression, to make sure that we still had a U.S. auto industry and can produce clean cars for the future, that we made the biggest investment in clean energy in our history so that solar panels and wind turbines are built here in the United States and not somewhere overseas, that we are working to expand exports, that we're improving our education system, that we've got a health-care system that is now on track to provide better quality at a better price.
Nobody believes that tax cuts for the wealthiest 2 percent is somehow going to significantly cut our unemployment rate. Nobody thinks that us cutting education is going to prepare us for long-term competitiveness. Nobody thinks, by the way, that Republicans actually have a very good track record when it comes to dealing with debt and deficits. Last time we had a balanced budget and surpluses was under a Democratic president, and they ran up the tab so that I inherited a $1.3 trillion deficit.
THE FIRST LADY: It's the norm. But unemployment is high, folks are hurting. There is nothing that I would look at in this year. I wouldn't look at not giving this country healthcare, I wouldn't I wouldn't want to take back any of the investments that we have made in education. So I think from a policy perspective, he has done an outstanding job.
THE PRESIDENT: First of all, I think that -- no matter what happened in the election -- the first two years were all about saving the economy from a crisis, and we have done that. The economy has now stabilized. ...We have gotten the economy to grow again, our focus now has to be on issues like education, issues like investing in research and development, issues like infrastructure development.... So my hope is is that new Republican leadership -- those who are coming in -- that they welcome the opportunity to work together...with me and other Democrats...to focus on solving the country's problems instead of focusing on politics. And, and I am confident that we are gonna be able to do that.
THE PRESIDENT: We've actually taken a whole series of steps to reform the education system, that are unprecedented, and have gotten compliments from Republicans, including people like Newt Gingrich. So, that's one area where I think we can make a difference right away...We're going to have to do something about the deficit and the debt. And the problem is that historically, at least lately, there's been a lot of rhetoric on all sides that, that pretends that somehow we can have something for nothing. That we can, you know, fund all our important programs, maintain our safety net, make sure social security and Medicare are safe, have, you know, a defense department that gets everything that it wants, and we don't end up having to pay for it. And that's going to be an area where I think we've got to have an honest conversation. ...
It's not an issue of big government versus small government. It's an issue of smart government. You know, when -- when families sit around the kitchen table, they say to themselves, what are the things we have to have -- College education for our kids, paying our mortgage, getting the roof repaired, a new boiler. What are the things that would be nice to have -- a vacation, eating out, some new clothes. And if they can afford it, they'd buy things that they'd like to have, but the first thing they do is take care of the things that we have to have.
And under that category, I'd put things like research and development, education, making sure that we're sending our kids to college, rebuilding our infrastructure to compete on the 21st century, making sure that this country is safe. The other stuff then we have to debate and figure out, can we get by with a little bit less in some of these other spending categories? And that's going to be a tough discussion, but it's one I'm confident we can have.
Because she was sick, no insurer would cover her. As she put it, she was scared to death, not of cancer, but how she'd pay her bills with each round of chemo that cost $16,000. And she thought that she and her husband Matt would have to spend everything they saved to pay for their two sons' college education in order to afford treatment.
Now, as vital as this reform is, as committed as we are to getting our implementation right, to win the future in this new and changing world is going to require more from us. And I believe we're up to the task. I think that we can create the jobs of the future by fortifying our lead in innovation, including investing in biotechnology that can deliver new cures for crippling diseases. We can fill those jobs by guaranteeing all our children have the best skills and education possible. We can convince the businesses and industries of the 21st century to take root right here by building and deploying a new network of infrastructure.
And you know, I don't think that it's contradictory to say that we want to get our fiscal house in order so that we can really make sure that we're doing everything we can on education, and doing everything we can on research and development, everything we can on promoting clean energy jobs, because as long as our fiscal house isn't in order, then it's very hard to move forward on new initiatives that would make a big dent on the unemployment front.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think there are a number of things we can do without Congress. As you know, we started back in the fall saying we can't wait. And so helping families refinance their homes, we went ahead and did it administratively. Some of the changes that we're making on immigration, we're trying to make sure that we're prioritizing criminals. That the three in 10 program is something that we can change administratively so that families aren't separated so long, when they have the opportunity to apply for citizenship. There are things that we're doing with community colleges, and on education that we can do administratively. But ultimately, we can obviously do a lot more if Congress is willing to move.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I'll let Governor Romney speak to his own taxes. What I know is that as a general rule, those who are making the most in the top one percent or in the top one-tenth of one percent often times pay lower tax rates than their secretaries, or their drivers, or the people who are working in their homes. And that's not fair. Now what makes it especially important is because right now we've got a big deficit. And we're all debating how do we reduce the government debt and the deficit, so we have a stable fiscal environment. We can't reduce the deficit if people like me or anybody else who's making a lot of money are in a position where they're paying the lowest rate in taxes in 50 years, even lower than they were under Ronald Reagan, lower than they were under Bill Clinton. It's not good for the economy. It's not good for our deficit. And ultimately what we don't want to do is to cut more programs for higher education or cut more programs in basic science and research that create these tremendous innovations like you see here in Intel. If instead we could be making those investments, also closing our deficit by making sure that everybody is paying their fair share.
Now, I see three areas where we need to focus if we're really going to keep the recovery going, but take it to new heights. Number one, we've got to make America a magnet for good jobs. Number two, we've got to make sure that workers are able to get the education and skills they need to do those jobs. Number three, we've got to make sure that, if and when you're working hard, that that leads to a decent living.
And later today I'm going to visit with a program that helps people who have gone through some tough circumstances, especially low-income dads, and this program is now helping them get the training and the guidance they need to find work and support a family. The—which is a priority because—and probably, some of these folks who I'm meeting, they didn't get that early childhood education that put them on the right track. And what we want to do is, first of all, make sure our kids are getting the training they need, but if they missed out early on, we still want to give them opportunity on the backend.
But obviously, the training of kids, giving them good education, training older workers, none of that is going to make a difference if we don't have great companies that are hiring. And that's why I wanted to come to Ellicott.
Wouldn't we be better off if every American could find a good job that pays the bills and lets you afford a home and maybe take a vacation, put some money away to retire? Wouldn't we all be better off if we knew that all of our kids were getting a good education from an earliest age, if we reformed our high schools for this new economy, if we're helping more young people afford to go to college?
THE PRESIDENT: But I think what folks all across the country would tell you is we've got a lot more work to do. Wages and salaries haven't gone up. Middle-class families are still struggling to make sure they can pay for their kids' college education. They're still concerned about whether they can retire.
We need to rebuild an economy that rewards hard work and responsibility, an economy built firmly on the cornerstones of middle class life: good jobs, a good education, a home of your own, a secure retirement, and quality, affordable health care that's there when you need it.
And if we spent the same amount of money on health care that Canada or France or Great Britain did, or Japan, or any other industrialized country, with the same outcomes or better outcomes, that essentially would remove our structural deficit, which would then free up dollars for us to invest in early childhood education and infrastructure and medical research and all the other things that can make sure that we're competitive and growing rapidly over the long term.
Now, I want everybody to understand what's happened, because sometimes when this gets reported on, everybody kind of thinks, well, you know, both sides are just squabbling; Democrats and Republicans, they're always arguing, so neither side is behaving properly. I want everybody to understand what's happened here. The Republicans passed a temporary budget for 2 months at a funding level that we, as Democrats, actually think is way too low because we're not providing help for more small businesses, doing more for early childhood education, doing more to rebuild our infrastructure. But we said, okay, while we're still trying to figure out this budget, we're prepared to go ahead and take the Republican budget levels that they proposed.
And if, in fact, we are helping to assure that that kid over there who's not my kid has a chance at a good education or that guy over there who I'm not related to has a chance at a decent job and a decent retirement, I'm going to be better off. I'm going to be living in a society that is more cohesive and is going to create the kind of future for our kids that we all want.

And that, more than anything, is at the core of the debate that I have been having with the Republican Party over the last several years. It's not just the details of the Affordable Care Act or, you know, the minimum wage, because, as I said yesterday in the speech, look, if you have got better ideas for achieving the same goal, put them out there. I'm not wedded to one particular way of doing things. But the central argument I have is, we do have an obligation to each other. And there's some things we can do together. And, in fact, the big challenges that we have, whether it's immigration, climate change, an economy that works for everybody, improving our education system, making college more affordable, competing in the world economy...

It's a good start that earlier this week, for the first time in years, both parties in both Houses of Congress came together to pass a \"budget. That unwinds some of the damaging sequester cuts that created headwinds for our economy. It clears the path for businesses and for investments that we need to strengthen our middle class, like education and scientific research. And it means that the American people won't be exposed to the threat of another reckless shutdown every few months. So that's a good thing. 
Let me repeat: I think 2014 needs to be a year of action. We've got work to do to create more good jobs, to help more Americans earn the skills and education they need to do those jobs, and to make sure that those jobs offer the wages and benefits that let families build a little bit of financial security. We still have the task of finishing the fix on our broken immigration system. We've got to build on the progress we've painstakingly made over these last 5 years with respect to our economy and offer the middle class and all those who are looking to join the middle class a better opportunity, and that's going to be where I focus all of my efforts in the year ahead.
And as long as I've got an opportunity every single day to make sure that in ways large and small, I'm creating greater opportunity for people—more kids are able to go to school, get the education they need; more families are able to stabilize their finances; the housing market is continuing to improve; people feel like their wages maybe are inching up a little bit—if those things are happening, I'll take it.
Here's the good news: I want to emphasize the positive as we enter into this holiday season. I think Congressman Ryan and Senator Murray did a good job in trying to narrow the differences and actually pass a \"budget that I can sign. It's not everything that I would like, obviously. It buys back part of these across-the-board cuts, the so-called sequester, but not all of them. So we're still underfunding research, we're still underfunding education, we're still underfunding transportation and other initiatives that would create jobs right now.
And this opportunity agenda has four parts. Number one, we need more new jobs. Number two, we need to train more Americans with the job—with the skills that they need to fill those jobs. Number three, we should guarantee every child access to a world-class education. And number four, let's make sure hard work pays off.
And that's why last night I laid out new steps we can take right now to speed up economic growth, strengthen the middle class, and build new ladders of opportunity into the middle class. It's an opportunity agenda, because opportunity is what America is all about. And the agenda has four parts. Number one, more new jobs: jobs in American manufacturing, jobs in American energy, jobs in American innovation and technology. Number two, we've got to train more Americans with the skills that we need to fill those jobs. Number three, we've got to guarantee every child in America a world-class education. And number four, we've got to make sure hard work pays off.
So the first thing is, let's create more new jobs. Number two, we've got to train Americans with the skills to fill those jobs. Americans like Reggie, we've got to get them ready to take those jobs. Number three, we've got to guarantee every child access to a world-class education, because that's where the foundation starts for them to be able to get a good job.
And I just want to make a quick comment on that. A lot of parents, unfortunately, maybe when they saw a lot of manufacturing being offshored, told their kids, "You don't want to go into the trades, you don't want to go into manufacturing, because you'll lose your job." Well, the problem is that what happened, a lot of young people no longer see the trades and skilled manufacturing as a viable career. But I promise you, folks can make a lot more, potentially, with skilled manufacturing or the trades than they might with an art history degree. Now, nothing wrong with an art history degree—[laughter]—I love art history. So I don't want to get a bunch of e-mails from everybody. [Laughter] I'm just saying, you can make a really good living and have a great career without getting a 4-year college education as long as you get the skills and the training that you need.
So the opportunity agenda I've laid out is going to help us do just that. Part one of this agenda is more new jobs that pay a good wage, jobs in manufacturing and exports and energy and innovation. Part two, we've got to train the folks with the skills to fill those jobs. Part three, we've got to make sure every child gets a world-class education. And part four, we've got to make sure that the economy rewards hard work for every American.
And fortunately, we've got a bunch of Democratic Governors who have been willing to implement what I've called an opportunity agenda and that I talked about in the State of the Union. Number one, that we're creating more good jobs out here through manufacturing and clean energy and making sure that we're rebuilding our infrastructure—our bridges, our roads, our ports—all across the country. Number two, making sure that we are giving every child in this country the best education they can get, because we know in the 21st century, that's what it's going to take for them to compete. Number three, training folks throughout their lives with the skills they need to get those good jobs. Number four, making sure that work pays, that if you're out working hard, you're not in poverty and you have a chance to get ahead.
And ultimately, that's what the American people are interested in. They're not interested in ideological battles. What they're interested in is action that is focused on their lives, on their hopes, on their aspirations. That's what they want us to focus on each and every day. And that's what we are offering: more jobs, better training, better education, better pay, more ladders of opportunity for folks who currently don't have opportunity. That's what our agenda is about, and it is an agenda that resonates with the American people.
Job number two is training more Americans with the skills they need to fill those good jobs so that our workforce is prepared for the jobs of tomorrow. Part three: guaranteeing every young person in this country access to a world-class education, from pre-K all the way to a college education like the one you're getting here.
And today, more young people are earning college degrees than ever before. Of course—and I know your president won't disagree with this—we've also got to do more to rein in the soaring costs of college and help more Americans who are trapped by student loan debt. The bottom line, though, is whether it's technical training, community college, 4-year university, no young person should be priced out of a higher education. [Applause] Shouldn't happen.
So this is good for business, it is good for America. Because even though we're bringing manufacturing jobs back to the United States, creating more good jobs in education and health care and business services, there will always be airport workers, there are always going to be fast-food workers, there are always going to be hospital workers, there are going to be retail salespeople, hospitality workers, people who work their tails off every day. People working in nursing homes, looking after your grandparents or your parents. Folks who are doing all the hard jobs that make our society work every single day. They don't have anything flashy out there. And you know what, they're not expecting to get rich, but they do feel like, if they're putting in back-breaking work every day, then at least at the end of the month, they can pay their bills.
So at my State of the Union at the beginning of the year, I laid out an opportunity agenda to give more Americans a chance to succeed. It's got four parts. Number one, making sure we're creating more good jobs that pay good wages. Number two, making sure that we're training more Americans with the skills that are needed to fill those jobs. Number three, making sure every child in America gets a world-class education. And number four, which is what I'm going to be focusing on today, making sure that our economy rewards the hard work of every American.
A few years ago, I announced a new competition called the Aspen Prize to recognize exceptional community colleges, and lo and behold—[laughter]—your school, Valencia, was the very first school in the entire country to win this prize, and which—[applause]. So between the students' hard work, the outstanding faculty, the administrators who are making sure everybody has what they need to succeed, Valencia graduates are leaving here ready for a career, ready to continue their education, ready to pursue their dreams, wherever they may lead.
Part three you know something about: We've got to make sure every young person has access to a world-class education, from high-quality preschool for every 4-year-old to an affordable college education for all you striving young people.
My point is—and I'm saying now to the men—we've all got a stake in this. Women make up about half of our workforce. Over half of Valencia's students, 56 percent, are women. In fact, for more than two decades, women have earned over half of the higher education degrees awarded in this country. So that means soon, for the first time, America's highly educated workforce will be made up of more women than men.
Today, more women are their family's main breadwinner than ever before. But on average, women are still earning just 77 cents on every dollar that a man does. Women with college degrees may earn hundreds of thousands of dollars less over the course of her career than a man at the same educational level. And that's wrong. This isn't 1958, it's 2014. That's why the first bill I signed into law was called the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act, and it made sure that it was easier for women to sue if they weren't being paid the same as men.
As Secretary of the VA, he presided over record investments in our veterans: enrolling 2 million new veterans in health care; delivering disability pay to more Vietnam veterans exposed to agent orange; making it easier for veterans with posttraumatic stress, mental health issues, and traumatic brain injury to get treatment; improving care for our women veterans. At the same time, he helped reduce veteran homelessness and helped more than 1 million veterans, servicemembers, and their families pursue their education under the post-9/11 GI bill.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think—here's what's interesting. There's a huge gap between the professed values and visions of corporate CEOs and how their lobbyists operate in Washington. And I've said this to various CEOs. When they come and they have lunch with me—which they do more often than they probably care to admit [laughter]—and they'll say, you know what, we really care about the environment, and we really care about education, and we really care about getting immigration reform done—then my challenge to them consistently is, is your lobbyist working as hard on those issues as he or she is on preserving that tax break that you've got? And if the answer is no, then you don't care about it as much as you say.
We all share the same aspirations for our young people. And I was encouraged that this year, Republicans agreed to investments that expanded early childhood education. I think we've got a chance to do more on that front. We've got some common ideas to help more young people afford college and graduate without crippling debt so that they have the freedom to fill the good jobs of tomorrow and buy their first homes and start a family.
And there are some things like rebuilding our infrastructure or early childhood education that we know works. And I'm hoping that the kind of attitude and approach that Mitch McConnell and John Boehner have already expressed, their desire to get things done, allows us to find some common ground.
And the only difference between, I guess, basketball and politics is that the only score that matters is how did somebody else do, not how you did. And that's the score I'm keeping. Am I going to be able to look back and say, are more people working? Are their bank accounts better? Are more kids going to college? Is housing improved? Is the financial system more stable? Are younger kids getting a better education? Do we have greater energy independence? Is the environment cleaner? Have we done something about climate change? Have we dealt with an ongoing terrorist threat and helped to bring about stability around the world? And those things—every single day, I've got an opportunity to make a difference on those fronts, which is——
I'll have more opportunity to pay tribute to Chuck's life of service in the days ahead. For now, let me just say this: Chuck Hagel has devoted himself to our national security and our men and women in uniform across more than six decades. He volunteered for Vietnam and still carries the scars and shrapnel from the battles that he fought. At the VA, he fought to give our veterans, especially his fellow Vietnam veterans, the benefits they had earned. As head of the USO, he made sure America always honors our troops. As a Senator, he helped lead the fight for the post-9/11 GI bill, which is helping so many of our newest veterans and their families realize their dreams of a college education. As Secretary, Chuck has helped transition our military and bolstered America's leadership around the world. During his tenure, Afghan forces took the lead for security in Afghanistan. Our forces have drawn down. Our combat mission there ends next month, and we'll partner with Afghans to preserve the gains we have made.
College, number one, far and away, followed by taxes, housing, employment, education.

Grove: All right, Mr. President. So the next issue we're going to tackle is education.

Mota: So my first question for you is regarding education.

So my question for you is how can -- what do you think is the best long-term plan for making education as a whole more affordable for students?

And dating back to Abraham Lincoln, who started something called the land grant colleges. And he understood that government should invest in people being able to get an education and having the tools to succeed.

Swisher. We're going to go from cyber security, your relationship with Silicon Valley, privacy, STEM education.

And, you know, the more transparent we are, the more customers can make a choice. There are circumstances — I'll give one specific example that I talked a while back, about when it comes to educational technologies being sold and put into schools. And then it turns out that some kid who's going online to communicate with their teacher — their data is going to some marketing company that then sells to the kid. I think that's got to be off-limits. So there are going to be some areas where we just say no, even if the consumer is aware of it ahead of time.

The President. First of all, we're not losing it rapidly. But what is true is that our lead will erode if we don't make some good choices now. STEM education, huge priority. Homegrown — we've got to have our kids in math and science, and it can't just be a handful of kids. It's got to be everybody. Everybody's got to learn how to code early. Everybody's got to...

Marc Maron. —and around education and around you know the sort of corporate occupation of the American government.

The President. And so we put together a task force with police officers and young people, including some of the people who lead the Ferguson marches, and surprisingly they came up with a consensus of things that could be done that would make things better. Alright, so lets implement those. Now, in the mean time what are we doing to help those lowest income communities? We know that, for example, early childhood education works. That is one way to break the legacy of racism and poverty. If a three year old, four year old kid is in an environment of love and is getting a good meal—

We believe every child deserves a shot at a great education. One of the initiatives I'm proudest of is something we call ConnectEd, and it's a program we started to close the technology gaps in our schools and connect 99 percent of America's students to high-speed Internet by the year 2018. And if you want to see the difference this can make in a child's life, look at Nanwalek, on Alaska's southern coast. It is remote. Like a lot of Alaskan communities, you can only get there by boat or by plane. But today, with the help of Apple, all 80 of its students, most of whom are Native—Alaska Natives, now learn in classrooms with fast Internet and iPads and digital content. Most of these kids don't have Internet at home. But in the classroom, they've got the tools to compete with any child around the world.
I do want to thank Congress for ending the year on a high note. I got to sign an education bill that is going to fix some of the challenges that we had with No Child Left Behind and promises to invest more in high-quality early childhood education. We signed a transportation bill that, although not as robust as I think we need, still allows States and local governments to plan and actually get moving, putting people back to work rebuilding our roads and our bridges. We got Ex-Im Bank back to work supporting American exports.
Now, I just want to repeat—because sometimes we take for granted what's happened—I said early on in this process that I wasn't going to sign a budget that did not relieve sequester, this artificial austerity that was making it difficult for us to invest in things like education and our military. And I said I would not accept a lot of ideological riders that were attached to a big budget deal. And we met our goals.
And because of some terrific negotiations by the Democrats up on Capitol Hill and, I think, some pretty good work by our legislative staffs here, we're going to be able to fund environmental protection. We're going to be able to make sure that we're investing in things like early childhood education and making college more affordable. We're going to be able to implement the Clean Power Plant rule. We're going to be able to continue to invest in clean energy that spurs on innovation. We're going to be able to make sure that our military gets the equipment and the training that it needs in order to be effective in fighting ISIL and other threats around the world. So it was a good win. And there are some things in there that I don't like, but that's the nature of legislation and compromise. And I think the system worked.
Number three: a pair of Christmas miracles in Washington. This week, Congress passed a bipartisan budget that invests in middle class priorities, keeps our military the strongest in the world, and takes the threat of shutdowns and manufactured crises off the table for 2016. Plus, I signed a bipartisan education bill into law to help our students graduate prepared for college and their future careers. Number two: Love won. No matter who you are, here in America, you're free to marry the person you love, because the freedom to marry is now the law in all 50 States.
This is going to be, I think, a major topic of conversation for everyone — parents, students, professors and administrators going forward. And I think the basic principle that we should be working towards is that everyone needs more than just a secondary school education, whether it's a two-year or four-year degree — that lifelong learning is increasingly what's going to be necessary to be competitive in this dynamic economy — and that it's got to be affordable. We can't have situations where young people are loaded up with $50,000, $75,000 or $100,000 worth of debt coming out of school.

The President. Well first of all, it is absolutely true that there are a lot of folks who still are struggling out there, and we can't minimize that. There (are) trends that have been taking place over the last 20 (or) 30 years that have dampened wage growth, that have made it tougher for folks to save for retirement or for their kids' college education — and there's a whole range of things that can make a difference. Some of them we've done — we've worked on — like improving the education system and making sure that we are making college accessible.

But that's the story that's been told. And I'm here to say, Elkhart, 7½ years since I first came here, we've got to challenge the assumptions behind this economic story. And the reason is, it has ended up dividing Americans who actually have common economic interests and should be working together for a better deal from the people who serve them. And it's made people cynical about government, and it's kept working families from pushing our political system to actually address our economic challenges in a realistic way. Families of all races and all backgrounds deserve higher wages. Families of all races and all backgrounds deserve quality health care and decent retirement savings. Every child in this country deserves an education that lets them dream bigger than the circumstances in which they're born.
Priority number two: We need to better prepare our children and our workers for the high-tech, high-wage jobs of tomorrow. Now, we actually know what works here, we just don't do it. We know early childhood education works. And we should invest in smart ways of doing it across the country, especially because childcare costs take up a huge share of a family budget. We know that we have to make college more affordable and job training more available. And one way to do that is to provide 2 years of community college for free for every responsible student. There are mayors and there are Governors who are already doing good work on these issues across party lines. They've shown the way. Now we need Congress to do the same.
But I've got to say, the folks on the other side of the aisle have opposed our efforts to close these loopholes. How do they explain it? When big corporations and wealthy individuals don't pay their fair share of taxes—and by the way, a lot of people do, so I'm not painting with a broad brush here, but there are a lot of folks who don't—when they don't pay their fair share of taxes, it means either you're paying more or it means we don't have enough revenue to support things like rebuilding our roads or funding our public universities, which means tuition goes up, and then you're trying to figure out how to pay for your kid's college education. We should have closed these loopholes a long time ago, and Lord knows, I have tried every year in my budget. We should have used some of the savings that we get from them paying their fair share to give tax breaks that would actually help working families pay for childcare or would help you send your kids to college or would help you save for retirement.
The President. ——then the debate—then, if that's what you're concerned about—the economy—the debate is not even close. One path would lead to lower wages. It would eliminate worker protections. It would cut investments in things like education. It would weaken the safety net. It would kick people off health insurance. It would let China write the rules for the global economy. It would let Big Oil weaken rules that protect our air and water. It would let big banks weaken rules that protect families from getting cheated. It would cut taxes for the wealthiest Americans to historic lows. Those are the facts. And I know it sounds like a strange agenda for politicians who are claiming to care about you and working families. But those are their plans. You can find it on their websites. And when I hear working families thinking about voting for those plans, then I want to have an intervention. [Laughter] I want you to just take a look at what you're talking about here.
The President. I think it's a three-legged stool and you left out one, which is vigorous enforcement of antidiscrimination laws. So the way we thought about it when we came in is that — and obviously we came in during crisis, so how we might have structured our policy sequencing if, when we came in, the economy was okay, and we weren't potentially going into a great recession, and folks weren't all losing their homes, might have been different. But as a general matter, my view would be that if you want to get at African American poverty, the income gap, wealth gap, achievement gap, that the most important thing is to make sure that the society as a whole does right by people who are poor, are working class, are aspiring to a better life for their kids. Higher minimum wages, full-employment programs, early-childhood education: Those kinds of programs are, by design, universal, but by definition, because they are helping folks who are in the worst economic situations, are most likely to disproportionately impact and benefit African Americans. They also have the benefit of being sellable to a majority of the body politic.

Now, does that mean that all vestiges of past discrimination would be eliminated, that the income gap or the wealth gap or the education gap would be erased in five years or 10 years? Probably not, and so this is obviously a discussion we've had before when you talk about something like reparations. Theoretically, you can make, obviously, a powerful argument that centuries of slavery, Jim Crow, discrimination are the primary cause for all those gaps. That those were wrongs done to the black community as a whole, and black families specifically, and that in order to close that gap, a society has a moral obligation to make a large, aggressive investment, even if it's not in the form of individual reparations checks, but in the form of a Marshall Plan, in order to close those gaps. It is easy to make that theoretical argument. But as a practical matter, it is hard to think of any society in human history in which a majority population has said that as a consequence of historic wrongs, we are now going to take a big chunk of the nation's resources over a long period of time to make that right. You can look at examples like postwar Germany, where reparations were paid to Holocaust victims and families, but —

The President. We were able to make sure that it stayed fair for a long time and that children going forward were not encumbered by some of that same bias of the past, I think it would not take long at all, because we are a talented, resourceful people. Just play this out as a thought experiment: Imagine if you had genuine, high-quality early-childhood education for every child, and suddenly every black child in America — but also every poor white child or Latino [child], but just stick with every black child in America — is getting a really good education. And they're graduating from high school at the same rates that whites are, and they are going to college at the same rates that whites are, and they are able to afford college at the same rates because the government has universal programs that say that you're not going to be barred from school just because of how much money your parents have. So now they're all graduating. And let's also say that the Justice Department and the courts are making sure, as I've said in a speech before, that when Jamal sends his résumé in, he's getting treated the same as when Johnny sends his résumé in.

And my argument — it's not even an argument — my conviction is that those fights need to be fought right now and can be won. And if in fact we have finite political capital, energy, resources, we need to win those fights. And if we win all those fights, and now let's say the income gap, and the wealth gap, and the education gap have for the most part been closed — let's say hypothetically, knowing what we know now about public policy, that we could close the education gap so that it was only a couple percentage points, and we could make sure that hiring barriers and educational barriers had been leveled down, and unemployment among African Americans right now instead of being double was only 10 percent higher than white unemployment — if we got to that point, first of all, America as a whole would be a lot richer. Second of all, the African American community would not just be wealthier, but it would actually also be more politically empowered by virtue of having more resources. Third, I actually believe that some residue of discrimination would lessen, because it's my view that there is a certain percentage of the white population that stereotypes and makes assumptions about African Americans because they don't inject the history of slavery and Jim Crow into current incarceration rates, or crime rates, or poverty rates, or what have you — but if they started having more middle-class black kids who are friends with their kids, eating Cheerios in their kitchen, their attitudes start changing. If we achieve all that and there's still a gap, at worst we're much better positioned to pursue strategies to close that final gap. And at best we might surprise ourselves in terms of how well we're doing.

So there's going to — as I said before, it's a generational project just to get America to live up fully to its ideals and to have the kind of society where everybody has a shot, and every kid is getting a good education, and people are getting living wages, and they have decent retirement. And if we got there and we looked up and we said, "You know what? Black folks are still doing a little bit worse off than whites, but it's not like it was 20 years ago," then we can have a discussion about how do we get that last little bit. But that's a high-class problem to have. And to me the question right now is: How do I close that first three-quarters of the achievement gap, education gap, wealth gap? What gives me the best chance to do that? And I'm pretty darn sure that if America is a just society and treating people well right now, irrespective of past wrongs, that I'm going to close a big chunk of that gap. I've seen it.

The President. No. I think, and look, Ta-Nehisi, I don't want to discount those criticisms, but offsetting those criticisms is that I have 90 percent or 95 percent support in the African American community and it's not sort of "Well, he's black, so it's okay. We're not going to say anything even though we're seething." And I hang out with a lot of middle-aged black women, and they're not casual in their support of me. There's a lot of love forthcoming. Partly because they understand the constraints of this society. They know that this is hard. And they also, I think, see me and Michelle trying. It's one thing if they were watching and we were not working on poverty issues, and we weren't working on education issues, and we weren't working on health-care issues. You know, they're pretty sophisticated; they understand that I'm trying to move an aircraft carrier here, I'm not just steering the speedboat. And so part of it is, I think, intellectual, and part of it is obviously emotional as well. But that support has been so constant and gracious and loving. Michelle and I have never felt as if, at any stage, folks didn't have our backs. And as a consequence, I think that just spurred us on that much more to make us want to do the right thing, and do our best in the positions that we have.

Again, the tax credits in the ACA will protect most consumers from the brunt of these premium increases. And with the ability to shop around on healthcare.gov, which works really well now—[laughter]—most people can find plans for prices even lower than this year's prices. But there are going to be people who are hurt by premium increases or a lack of competition and choice. And I don't want to see anybody left out without health insurance. I don't want to see any family having to choose between health insurance now or saving for retirement or saving for their kids' college education or just paying their own bills.

The truth is, on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives – on health care and education and the economy – Senator McCain has been anything but independent. He said that our economy has made "great progress" under this President. He said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong. And when one of his chief advisors – the man who wrote his economic plan – was talking about the anxiety Americans are feeling, he said that we were just suffering from a "mental recession," and that we've become, and I quote, "a nation of whiners."
Now, I don't believe that Senator McCain doesn't care what's going on in the lives of Americans. I just think he doesn't know. Why else would he define middle-class as someone making under five million dollars a year? How else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million Americans? How else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people's benefits, or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college, or a plan that would privatize Social Security and gamble your retirement?
Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves – protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology.
Now is the time to finally meet our moral obligation to provide every child a world-class education, because it will take nothing less to compete in the global economy. Michelle and I are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education. And I will not settle for an America where some kids don't have that chance. I'll invest in early childhood education. I'll recruit an army of new teachers, and pay them higher salaries and give them more support. And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability. And we will keep our promise to every young American – if you commit to serving your community or your country, we will make sure you can afford a college education.
The President. Good. Well, you raise a couple of important points. Number one, doctors--and I'm assuming that we've got somebody--and I'm going to call on them in a second--but I've got a lot of very close friends who are doctors. And the enormous pressure and strain that the medical profession is now feeling from a whole variety of sources is something that we've got to attend to in this reform process. We're not producing enough primary care physicians, because the costs of medical education are so high that people feel they've got to specialize.
You've done a great job by proposing an increase in nursing education in your 2010 budget and by including nurse education funding in the Recovery Act. I'd love to hear your thoughts. If not--if there's no time today, I'd love to pursue this--there are other nurses in the room--on how we can further advance nursing education and faculty training, because they are going to be essential to our overall efforts to contain costs while expanding and improving care. Thank you very much.
We've got to put our growth model on a different footing, and that means that we've got to deal with our health care system and reduce costs for families, businesses, and governments. It means that we have to think through our energy policy so that we're not so badly dependent on foreign oil. It means we've got to improve our education system so that our young people are equipped with the skills and knowledge that they're going to need to get jobs in the future.
And on education, how do we build on the reforms that we talked about during the campaign and that are funded, at least temporarily, through the stimulus package. And I gave a major speech on education priorities yesterday.
And so part of what I think every State should be doing right now is figuring out, A, how do we invest in our people so that we're attracting world-class businesses who are looking for world-class employees? I think getting K-12 education right, not short-changing higher education, I think those things are absolutely critical; thinking about where can--where do strategic infrastructure investments make sense. You know, if you think about the Midwest, one of the problems is, is that--this is my stenographer. She just wants to make sure that I'm not tripping over myself.
My goal here is to create laboratories of innovation so that in the public school system, we are on a race to the top as opposed to stuck in the old ways of doing things. And we've got to; we've got to do that. In your home town of Cleveland, I don't know off the top of my head what the dropout rate is, but I've got to assume that it's hovering around 50 percent. If you look at the number of children going through the Cleveland public schools who are actually prepared to go to college, it's probably 1 out of 7 or 8 or 10. And that's just not acceptable. It's not acceptable for them; it's not acceptable in terms of America's economic future. And so we've got to experiment with ways to provide a better educational experience for our kids, and some charters are doing outstanding jobs. So the bottom line is to try to create innovation within the public school system that can potentially be scaled up, but also to make sure that we are maintaining very high standards for any charter school that's created.
Here's what we do, though, we say that on health care, energy, and education, it's time for us to make investments that had been put off for decades and had made us less competitive. And every dime of increased spending that we include in those areas we offset either with additional revenues or with cuts, and we cut a lot of stuff.
And on education, if we're pricing people out of the college market, if nobody wants to teach because teachers don't get paid much, if we're not investing in early childhood education, if we're not investing in science and technology, then we're going to fall behind.
The other message, though, is that there are no shortcuts to long-term economic growth, and we can't just keep on doing the same things that we were doing before and somehow expect that all our problems are going to be solved. We've got to tackle some of these things like health care, energy, and education that have been put off for too long.
Because we know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow, this budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability in our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anyone who wants it.
The President. Well, I say our challenges are too large to ignore. The cost of health care is too high to ignore. The dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that got us to this point. I didn't run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation or the next President. I ran for President to solve these problems so that you've got a better shot at life.
So I will--and I will also say this, that my obligation is to make sure that we've improved our economy, that we've gotten serious on health care, made significant progress on energy, made education more affordable, and improved the excellence of our educational system K-12, that we have started controlling our deficits.
So what we've tried to do is to say, let's, right now, just focus on getting the economy back on track, reducing unemployment, creating jobs, making sure our school systems still have teachers, cops are still on the streets, firefighters are still in the station house. Let's do what we need to do to get through this difficult time. Let's make some investments in health care, energy, education that will lay the foundation for long-term economic growth. But let's also start making some tough choices about the deficit as soon as we get out of this recovery.
The President. Well, look, we--most of--almost all of the money that's going to States under the Recovery Act for education is designed to retain teachers. Almost--the lion's share of it, I mean, there's some money for school construction as well, and there's some money for innovation, because we can't just put more money into the schools without also reforming the schools and making them better.
One last point I want to make about education. This budget that we are now arguing about--and you're going to be hearing a bunch of arguments about, oh, you know, Obama, he's a spendthrift, et cetera, et cetera--we reduce nondefense discretionary spending as a percentage of gross domestic product, but what we insist on is that we make some investments in education.
And I haven't--and one of the things that we haven't talked about is higher education. I've said we've got to increase student loans, student grants, the Pell grant program. That's got to be a priority. That's our future, and I'm going to fight for it. I don't care how long it takes; we're going to make it more affordable to go to college, because that's what everybody needs.
We have to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century. And that's exactly what this budget begins to do. It contains new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses, and new savings that will bring down our deficit.
The President. All right. Okay. [Laughter] Surprised--I am surprised compared to where I started, when we first announced for this race, by the number of critical issues that appear to be coming to a head all at the same time. You know, when I first started this race, Iraq was a central issue, but the economy appeared on the surface to still be relatively strong. There were underlying problems that I was seeing with health care for families and our education system and college affordability and so forth, but, obviously, I didn't anticipate the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
This metaphor has been used before, but the ship of state is an ocean liner, it's not a speed boat. And so the way we are constantly thinking about this issue of how to bring about the changes that the American people need is to say, if we can move this big battleship a few degrees in a different direction, we may not see all the consequences of that change a week from now or 3 months from now, but 10 years from now or 20 years from now, our kids will be able to look back and say that was when we started getting serious about clean energy; that's when health care started to become more efficient and affordable; that's when we became serious about raising our standards in education.
In the 21st century, we've learned that this truth is central not just to our own lives, but to our success as a nation. If our children cannot get the world-class education they need to succeed, then America will not be able to compete with other countries. If our families cannot afford health care, then the costs go up for all of us: individuals, businesses, and government. If folks down the street can't pay their mortgage and folks across town can't find a job, then that pain is going to trickle into other parts of our economy.
Now, we face enormous challenges as a nation. And many of those challenges are felt far more acutely by Latinos. But our ability to solve any of the problems we face, from health care to education, from economic recovery to immigration reform, depends on our willingness to recognize that our destiny is shared. We've seen this starkly throughout this economic crisis, as fortunes linked small-business owners on Main Street to the bond trader on Wall Street, the young family looking to refinance a mortgage to the large bank whose profits depend on their staying out of foreclosure. But this has always been true, in good times and bad. Our success has long depended on our willingness to see our challenges as ones we have to face together, our willingness to live up to a simple ideal: Todos somos Americanos—we are all Americans.
Because when there's a young Latina stuck in a crumbling school who starts to actually believe she's worth less because she doesn't have more, that isn't just a problem for that child. That isn't just a problem for the Hispanic community. That's a problem for our Nation. That's why I've challenged States to raise the bar across their early education programs, so that more of our children enter kindergarten ready to learn. That's why I've called for a new race to the top to reform America's schools and provide students with the knowledge and the skills they need for the 21st century. That's why we will address the dropout crisis that plagues far too many communities and commit to increasing access to college and success at college, so that America can once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. That depends in part on making sure that Latinos and Latinas have access to higher education, and that's a commitment of our administration.
We'll provide a complete and competitive education for every student, because our prosperity as a nation requires that we harness the talents of all our people, not just some. Todos somos Americanos.
On the education front, I just visited Martin Luther King Charter School, the first school to reopen in the Ninth Ward and an inspiration for this city. We've also worked to be a better partner and free up funding that has allowed places like this university right here, the University of New Orleans and the Southern University of New Orleans to rebuild. We're looking for ways to be more flexible, so New Orleans can build the school system it deserves. And because a lot of your public schools opened themselves up to new ideas and innovative reforms, we're actually seeing an improvement in overall achievement that is making the city a model for reform nationwide. That is good news, thanks to the hard work being done right here in New Orleans.
But the Recovery Act is just the start. If we want a recovery the lasts, if we want an economy that really grows again, we've got to rebuild stronger than before, just like you're doing here in New Orleans. We need to come together and meet the challenges that were with us before this recession hit: schools that weren't closing before the recession. That means building a clean energy economy that can lead to millions of new jobs and new industries. That means building an education system that equips every citizen with the skills and training they need to compete with any worker in the world. That means building a health care system that finally offers security to those who have insurance and affordable options to those who don't.
So I guess my point is this: I make no excuses for the fact that Federal Government did not work effectively with State and local governments immediately in the aftermath of the storm to make sure that everybody got the help they needed right away. And we are still working through the backlog of problems that exist. But you know, I will say that I think not only Democrat Mary Landrieu, but also, I think, Republican Governor Jindal will tell you that our team is outstanding, they are working really hard all the time to try to get these things resolved as quickly as possible. And my expectation is, is that by the time that my term is over, you guys are going to look back and you're going to say, this was a responsive administration on health care, on housing, on education, that actually made sure that the money flowed and that things got done the way they were supposed to get done.
And we had one question from Don Arrington, who says, "What confuses me is I have an MBA, and that has educated me right out of the market. I thought furthering my education was supposed to help me in a tough job market."
I guess what I'd say is, number one, we know long term that more education means more opportunity for the individual, greater income for the individual. That is not decreasing; that is actually increasing—the gap between higher education and somebody with a high school education. And in a knowledge-based economy, that's not going away.
So as frustrating as it may be for the college grad or the MBA, the fact of the matter is, you are still going to be much better off than if you didn't have that education, short term as well as long term. It is not only good for the individual, it is also critical for our economy.
I told this story, I think, in this room just a while back, but I just want to repeat it, because we were doing a session on science, technology, and math education. And one of the things that I'm very proud of in this administration that nobody, except maybe Friedman and a couple others, have paid attention to is, we are actually initiating more education reform, tougher education reform than just about any administration over the last several years, and people like Randi and others are helping us in this process.
But I told the story of my lunch with the President—President Lee of South Korea. And, Gary, you were in that lunch; remember, I asked him, "What's happening in terms of education policy in Korea?" And he said, "Well, you know, my biggest problem is Korean parents are too demanding, and they are insisting, for example, that I import, and I've had to import, thousands of foreign English teachers, because they all feel that first graders should be learning English already."
So as tough as this recession is, as tough as the job market may be, we need to double down on our education investment. We have to be more demanding of our schools, of ourselves as parents. Young people are going to have to be more demanding in terms of our ability to compete. And I don't want—the last thing I want—and this actually relates to the previous question—the last thing I want is us to essentially use up our seed corn here, to not make investments in education, to not make our investments in clean energy, to essentially say, the only way we can handle this is to constrict our dreams and to go small, because these other countries out there, they're making these investments in infrastructure, in education, in clean energy. And we can't lose the race just because we're going through a tough time right now. Now is the time actually to make sure that we're prioritizing properly and pushing even harder on that front.
And I strongly considered that argument. But I think the response is the point that was just made earlier, that if we keep on putting off tough decisions about health care, about energy, about education, we'll never get to the point where there's a lot of appetite for that. I mean, keep in mind we just went through 10, 15 years where everything looked pretty good. Except what happened was, is that that growth was built on a house of cards. The fundamentals of the economy were weakening. And they were papered over by massive leverage, credit card debt, a housing market bubble.
And finally, we have to recognize, as Dr. King did, that progress can't just come from without, it also has to come from within. And over the past year, for example, we've made meaningful improvements in the field of education. I've got a terrific Secretary of Education, Arne Duncan. He's been working hard with States and working hard with the DC school district, and we've insisted on reform, and we've insisted on accountability. And we we're putting in more money, and we've provided more Pell grants and more tuition tax credits and simpler financial aid forms. We've done all that, but parents still need to parent. Kids still need to own up to their responsibilities. We still have to set high expectations for our young people. Folks can't simply look to government for all the answers without also looking inside themselves, inside their own homes, for some of the answers.
What we're called to do, then, is rebuild America from its foundation on up. To reinvest in the essentials that we've neglected for too long, like health care, like education, like a better energy policy, like basic infrastructure, like scientific research. Our generation is called upon to buckle down and get back to basics.
Now, because of the steps we took, there are about 2 million Americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed. Two hundred thousand work in construction and clean energy. Three hundred thousand are teachers and other education workers. Tens of thousands are cops, firefighters, correctional officers, first-responders. And we're on track to add another 1 1/2 million jobs to this total by the end of the year.
Fourth, we need to invest in the skills and education of our people. Now, this year, we've broken through the stalemate between left and right by launching a national competition to improve our schools. And the idea here is simple: Instead of rewarding failure, we only reward success. Instead of funding the status quo, we only invest in reform, reform that raises student achievement, inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around failing schools that steal the future of too many young Americans, from rural communities to the inner city. In the 21st century, the best antipoverty program around is a world-class education. And in this country, the success of our children cannot depend more on where they live than on their potential. When we renew the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will work with Congress to expand these reforms to all 50 States.
That's the leadership we are providing: engagement that advances the common security and prosperity of all people. We're working through the G-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery. We're working with Muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation. We have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. We're helping developing countries to feed themselves and continuing the fight against HIV/AIDS. And we are launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease, a plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health abroad.
Now, we've made all this progress because of people like Barbara Boxer and the Members of Congress who are here today. And if you just tick off what has been accomplished this year in yanking this economic out of depression and getting it on a trajectory again, on having about as ambitious a education reform agenda that not many people talk about, but millions more young people are going to be able to afford to go to college--[applause]. We've cracked down on housing fraud; we've cracked down on credit card fraud. We are moving through the stimulus package----
So we're going to have some work ahead of us. But when you're asked by your friends, your neighbors, people who you're making sure contribute to Barbara Boxer's campaign, I just want you to remind them what Barbara has been for and what the other side has been for. If they want to talk about the stimulus, you just remind them that one-third of that is tax cuts. We have 25 different tax cuts, and 98 percent of Californians got a tax cut because of the vote that Barbara Boxer cast, the biggest tax cut in history, biggest investment in clean energy in history, biggest investment in education in history. When they were against it, Barbara Boxer was for it.
Here is my bottom line. We've got a lot of work to do on a whole range of issues. We still need comprehensive immigration reform. We still need to make sure our K through 12 education is serving our children. We still have to make our economy more competitive and spur on greater innovation and investment in research and development. We've still got to have some control over our fiscal system. And you are going to need somebody who is as passionate and as caring and as committed and as tough as the Senator that you've got right here, right now.
And so we had to act swiftly, and we did. We put in place the largest stimulus in history that included the largest investment in clean energy in history, the largest investment in Federal education in history, the largest investment in R&amp;D and science in history, the biggest tax cuts that we've seen in a very, very long time--going to 98 percent of Californians--all of which were designed to do two things, not just to wrench ourselves out of this immediate crisis, but were also designed to start laying a foundation for growth, because we knew that we couldn't keep repeating a pattern of bubble and bust that we'd been seeing, that it wasn't a tenable model for our future and of our--the future of our children and our grandchildren.
But it's true. One of the reasons to support Barbara Boxer is because you know exactly where she stands. You know where she came from. You know that she cares about working families. You know that she cares about giving them not a handout, but a hand up. You know that she cares about making sure that every child gets a decent education, that workers are getting decent wages and basic workplace protections. You know that she cares about making sure this environment and our natural resources are passed on to the next generation. You know that she cares about making sure that we've got a foreign policy that is smart and balanced and thinks about how we can work cooperatively with other nations even as we are adamant about our security.
Comprehensive immigration reform, we've got to get done. Making sure that we continue the progress that's already been made and we overturn "don't ask, don't tell," that has to get done. Making sure that we're investing in science and technology and continuing to make our education system work better than any education system in the world so that our children can compete, that remains to be done.
By the way, that's why we took on the special interests. We finally reformed the student loan system so it works for students and not bankers--saved us tens of billions of dollars in wasteful spending, and we're reinvesting that money where it should have gone in the first place, and that's to your education. We're making college more affordable, and we're upgrading America's most underappreciated asset, and that's community colleges just like this one. And we're proud to do it.
Now, there are going to be times where--there are times where I've got some differences with the unions on some issues. But that's--those are arguments among friends. I do think, for example, that it's important for us to reform our education system. And my sister's a teacher. I love teachers unions; I've been supportive of them ever since I got into politics. But I do want to partner with teachers to make sure that we are improving constantly how our kids perform. And we've got to have accountability in terms of how we are making progress in school districts all across the country.
Because I want young people in America not--at this point, we can't just graduate from high school; that's not enough. We've got to go on to community colleges or go on to a 4-year education because those are the jobs that are going to exist in the 21st century. I don't want our young people having to compete simply on the basis of their willingness to work in a factory, because it's going to be very hard for them to compete over the long term in other countries where the wages may be a lot lower unless they've got higher skills and they're bringing something different to the marketplace than some of these other workers.
The President. But I'll answer your question. You're absolutely right that we can do a great job financing community colleges and student loans and college educations, but if we haven't dealt with K through 12, we're going to have problems. And the truth is, we're slipping behind. We used to have by far the best education system in the world, by a huge margin. And we don't now. I mean, we've got some of the--we have--we still have the best universities in the world, the best college system in the world, and we have some of the best schools in the world. But our overall education system is kind of in the middle of the pack in terms of advanced countries, especially in science and math, which is a huge problem because science and math is the future. That's what's going to allow you to innovate.
So I've got this terrific Secretary of Education named Arne Duncan, and one of the things that Arne and I have been trying to do is to figure out how do we jump-start more educational excellence.
A couple of ways we've done it. First of all, the Recovery Act was also the largest investment in education by the Federal Government in history, above and beyond whatever annual funding folks get. And it helped to pay for new classrooms and new laboratories and teacher training programs and a whole host of things.
Last thing I'm going to say, and this is actually important not only about education, but about how we're going to succeed as a nation in this new century. We can have the best teachers in the world, we can fund the best programs in the world, we can give all the scholarships in the world, but if parents aren't parenting their kids and emphasizing the importance of learning and education, then it's not going to make any difference. That's the key.
So I want everybody here--as parents, as community members, as church members--to know that if we're supporting our kids and we are instilling the values of responsibility and hard work and excellence and second place isn't good enough, that's how America got built, that's how we're going to build up our education system, that's how we're going to improve our economy. Government can only do so much. We're going to be there to partner with you, but you're going to have to make it happen.
It's why we've made college more affordable, why we're reforming education. And that's good for all children, including Latinos, who, instead of having the highest dropout rate, deserve every chance to achieve their God-given potential.
And that's why I signed an Executive order to reestablish the White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. It's chaired by my Commerce Secretary, Gary Locke, and my Education Secretary, Arne Duncan. Are they here? There's Arne. It's easier to spot Arne than Gary. [Laughter] That's why we're always welcoming your input, from meetings with Sikh Americans to Native Hawaiians. The goal is to make sure that our Government is successfully working to address disparities in health care, in education, and economic opportunity that exists within various AAPI communities.
Sometimes these disparities don't get the attention they deserve. People get lumped into one category, and obviously, so many Asian Americans are doing so well that the fact of disparity is lost and forgotten. But as you know, beneath the label of AAPI are dozens of communities, and each is facing their own unique challenges. And that's part of what this education effort within Government is all about: to make sure we're not making generalizations, but rather, we're thinking in very particular terms about how we can help to give everyone in this country the opportunity they deserve.
As small-business owners, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders know how important it is that we continue to spur growth after a long and brutal recession. As parents, everybody here is concerned about the quality of our education system and making college more affordable and accessible. As Americans, we want to make sure that we're giving our children the same opportunities that were given to us. And you know that it's up to each generation of Americans to pass on that legacy, to make sure that America is living up to its promise, a place where all things are possible if you're willing to put in a lot of hard work.
And we said, you know, part of the innovation economy is making sure every child in America has a decent education, which meant we made the largest investment in education in our history, not only at the K-12 level, but also at the community college level and at the university level.
But the truth is, is that in order for us to succeed in bringing about the kind of America where everybody has opportunity, where our economy is growing and innovative and more stable, where our children are getting a good education, where we've got a sound health care system, where we've got an actual energy agenda, I can't do that by myself. I've got to have strong allies. I've got to have people with passion. I've got to have people who are willing to fight for what's right. I've got to have people who always have the voices of their constituents in their ear and understand and remember, no matter how long they've been in Washington, who it is that they're fighting for.
Where was I? [Laughter] I was going down memory lane. [Laughter] So we ended up initiating a series of steps: the largest investment in clean energy in our history, restoring the primacy of science and investing in research and development, the largest investment in infrastructure since Eisenhower built the interstate railway system, the largest investment in education by the Federal Government in our history, the most progressive tax cut in our history to restore a sense of fairness to our tax system, help for States so that they didn't have to lay off teachers and firefighters and police officers, including right here in California. Talk to Governor Schwarzenegger if you don't believe the kinds of help that was involved. And we did all this in the first month--the first month.
We know that if we want to build a real future in an economy this competitive, with China and India and Brazil and other countries on the rise, that we're going to have to go back to basics. We've got to fix our education system. We've got to make sure that every young person in America has a chance to go to college. We've got to make sure--and by the way, you may have missed it during the health care debate, but we added billions of dollars in funding to student loans by cutting out the financial middlemen. That was just--that didn't even get front-page news. We've got to strengthen our community colleges. We're going to have work to do implementing our health care bill. And we've also got some critical issues that all of us have in mind right now. And I'm going to mention two--and I mentioned these to the Republican caucus.
We launched the most aggressive education reforms in decades so that our children can gain the knowledge and skills they need to compete in a 21st-century global economy.
Our laws should respect families following the rules, instead of splitting them apart. We need to provide farms a legal way to hire the workers they rely on and a path for those workers to earn legal status. And we should stop punishing innocent young people for the actions of their parents by denying them the chance to stay here and earn an education and contribute their talents to build the country where they've grown up. The "DREAM Act" would do this, and that's why I supported this bill as a State legislator and as a U.S. Senator and why I continue to support it as President.
Having served as a State senator, having then served as a United States Senator, I had had a chance to see how economic policies were having an effect on working class families and middle class families for a long time. And my wife and I, we came out of hard-working families who didn't have a lot, but because the economy was growing, because there was an emphasis on what was good for the middle class, we were able to get a great education, we were able to get scholarships. Michelle's dad worked as a blue-collar worker, but just on that one salary he was able to provide for his family and make sure that they always had enough and the kids had opportunities.
A third area: education. A generation ago, we had the highest proportion of college graduates of any country in the world. We now rank 11th or 12th in the proportion of college graduates. Well, we can't win in an information society, in a global, technologically wired economy, unless we're winning that battle to make sure our kids can compete.
So what we've said is, we're going to put more money into higher education and through K through 12, but here's the catch: The money is only going to those communities that are serious about reforming their education system so they work well. Because it's--education is not just a matter of putting more money into it. You also have to make sure that we've got the best teachers, that we've got accountability, that the way we're designing our schools help our kids actually succeed over the long term, especially in areas of math and science, where we're lagging even further behind than we were a generation ago.
If we make investments and improve our education system; if we make investments in research and development; if we make investments in things like clean energy so that we've got an energy policy that's not just tied to importing oil from the Middle East, but instead start figuring out how can we develop our homegrown industries; if we have a tax system that is fair and helps the middle class and that also attends to our long-term deficit problems; if we regulate, but not with a heavy hand, just regulate enough to make sure that we don't have a collapse of the financial system and consumers aren't taken advantage of and health insurance companies are responsive to ordinary families--if we do those things, there's no reason why we can't succeed.
And one last thing I wanted to mention is actually education. The reason I didn't mention it up front is this has been one of the few areas where I've actually gotten some compliments from Republicans. I think the strategy that we have right now, which is to maintain high standards, work with States in a smart way to develop a--curriculums, teacher-training strategies, to boost our higher education--institutions of higher education, that's an area where we should all agree. Because it's indisputable that if we are working smarter, if our kids are better trained, then we will succeed. And if they're not, it doesn't really matter what else we do. Over time, we're going to decline.
Now, the Senate is going to have a chance to do the right thing over the next few weeks when Senator Reid brings the "DREAM Act" to the floor. Keep in mind, in the past, this was a bill that was supported by a majority of Democrats and Republicans. There's no reason why it shouldn't receive that same kind of bipartisan support today. I've been a supporter since I was in the Senate, and I will do whatever it takes to support the Congressional Hispanic Caucus's efforts to pass this bill so that I can sign it into law on behalf of students seeking a college education and those who wish to serve in our country's uniform. It's the right thing to do. We should get it done.
So middle-class families were feeling profoundly squeezed. It had been a long time since we'd had a serious effort to deal with some of those structural problems that were holding the middle class back — whether that was a health care system that was fundamentally broken; whether it was an education that was seeing our young people's performance in math and science, critical skills, fall behind other countries; whether that was the absence of an energy policy that could not only deal with the opportunities of a clean energy future but would also address climate change and the disruptions that came about as a consequence of the spot oil market.
And when I look back over the last two years, I can say with pride that we did stabilize the capital markets, did prevent a Great Depression, did save the U.S. auto industry, and we're still able to move forward on big chunks of that long-term agenda that I campaigned on. We were able to get health reform done. We've initiated the most significant education-reform agenda that we've seen in a generation. We've been able to put a lot more resources into higher education. And we were able to pass the kind of financial regulatory reform agenda that can prevent these kinds of crises in the future, while at the same time protecting consumers.
The kinds of issues that we're going to be working on legislatively going forward, I think there's more potential for bipartisan cooperation because they're less ideologically divisive. Like education. I mean, we have to do a reauthorization of the education laws in this country. And we haven't gotten a lot of attention over the last two years to the education-reform efforts that we've put in place. We're getting some attention now because people are noticing, You know what, Obama is actually not carrying the usual liberal party line on this thing; he's said we need more money, but he has also said we need more reform, and he's been willing to take on some of his own constituencies. And I think that this is one of those rare areas where I've even gotten some compliments from Republicans. And so I think that there's a possibility of getting a reauthorization bill that builds more consensus rather than becomes just a test of wills.
And the big debate that we're going to have to have as a country is what is important enough to us that we're willing to pay for it — and then who pays for it? I think Social Security is important and we have to pay for it. I think Medicare is important and we have to pay for it. I think both programs can be more efficient, but I think those provide a core safety net to the American people. I think that our investments in education are absolutely critical to our long-term economic health.
And so instead of doing all the talking, what I want to do is maybe just provide a few opening remarks and then basically have a conversation with you about things that are important to you and important to this community, important to this State. There is one thing I want to focus on, though, if you don't mind, in my opening remarks, and that's the issue of education. We have gone through obviously the toughest economic situation since the Great Depression, and no State has been untouched, no group of people has been untouched by the devastation. We lost 8 million jobs. The financial sector almost completely melted down. We almost slipped into a Great Depression. And so we acted very quickly to try to stop the bleeding.
Now, the truth of the matter is, we used to have by far the best education system in the world. We were the first nation in the world to have compulsory public education. And so as people were moving off the farms, moving into the cities, moving into industry, suddenly they were able to get the training and the skills they needed for an advanced industrial economy.
Even folks who didn't go to college still got a good education. My grandmother, she was an amazing woman. She passed away a couple of years ago. But she never went to college. She worked--when my grandfather went off to World War II, she worked on a assembly line making bombers. She was like Rosie the Riveter. And then when my grandfather came back, he got the GI bill to go to college, but she didn't get the GI bill, so she went to work. She started off as a secretary; she ended up as a vice president at a bank in Hawaii.
Well, now we rank 21st in science education in the world, and we rank 25th in math education in the world. So the trend line is that we're not at the top in terms of college graduates, we're not at the top at science, we're not at the top at math. We've got a third of our students who enroll who never graduate from high school. And all this means that not only is it bad for the young people who aren't getting this education--typically, a high school grad gets paid about $10,000 less than a college grad, and over the course of the lifetime, it means hundreds of thousand dollars in lost income--but it's also bad for the country as a whole because we don't have as many engineers, and we don't have as many scientists, we're not inventing the new products that are going to make all the difference in terms of how well we succeed.
So the reason I want to raise this is because there are a lot of issues we've been working on in Washington, a lot of them get a lot of attention, but something that hasn't gotten as much attention is what we've been trying to do working with States and local school districts over the last 2 years to make sure that we're moving in a new direction in improving our education system.
And as a consequence of this competition called Race to the Top--we had about $4 billion--we've ended up seeing 32 States change their laws to reform the system so that the whole education structure works better for our kids and makes it more accountable, and we start providing better training and better recruitment for our teachers and more professional development and additional resources.
So it's been a big boost for education all across the country, moving forward on a reform agenda that doesn't just dictate to States, here's how you have to do everything, but it says, here's some criteria for success; if you have a plan to match that, then we're going to help you. So that's number one.
Number two, we've been helping to make sure that more young people get early childhood education, because the studies show that if kids are well prepared when they get to school, then they are much likely to do better. If they know their colors and their numbers and their letters and they know how to sit still--I remember when Malia and Sasha were young; that was a key training point.
And so early childhood education is--when it's well designed, makes a big difference, and we've been doing that.
Third thing we've been doing is focusing on higher education. Now, it turns out that we've got--the lottery scholarship program here in New Mexico is terrific, but we've got a whole lot of States all across the country and a lot of young people who still rely on Pell grants and student loan programs in order to finance their overall education.
So there are a whole range of things that we're trying to do, working with colleges, community colleges, universities to try to improve our education system. One of the things that I announced this week was, we're really going to focus on science and math because that's where our young people, I think, are falling the most behind. And we've made a commitment that we're going to hire over the next couple of years 10,000 new science and math teachers. And we're going to work with the schools to help redesign their math and science curriculums so that we start boosting--I want to get to the point where we're number one in science and math.
Now, last point I'm going to make, and then I'm just going to open it up because I promised I wouldn't give a long speech: This election coming up in November is going to offer a choice on a whole range of different issues. And this issue of education gives you a sense of the choice that I think Democrats are trying to make and the choice that the Republicans are trying to make. The Republicans recently put out what they call their "Pledge to America." And it basically outlined what their priorities are.
That's their main economic plan. And when you ask them, "Well, how would you pay for some of this stuff?" they don't really have good answers. But one way they would pay for it is to cut back our education spending by 20 percent and eliminate about 200,000 Head Start programs and reduce student aid to go to college for about 8 million students.
That's one of their answers. And I just have to say, look, China, that's not the decision they're making about their education system and their kids. South Korea, that's not the decision that they're making about their kids.
I was in South Korea, and I was talking to the P resident, having lunch, and he said, you know, my biggest problem in education is, the parents are so demanding. They're insisting that I ship in English--people from the United States and other English-speaking countries because they want all their kids to learn English by the time they're in third grade.
I mean, that's the--that's their mindset. That's the competition that they're in. So they're not cutting back on education right when we know that that's going to be the most important thing in determining our success over the long term. And we can't either. And so I just want everybody to think about those kinds of issues as you go into the polling place in November: Who's going to prioritize our young people to make sure they've got the skills they need to succeed over the long term? Nothing's going to be more important in terms of our long-term success.
All right? So with that, let me just open it up to any comments or questions people may have about anything. I talked a lot about education, but people may have a whole bunch of different interests here, and I'd love to hear from you. And we've got mikes so that everybody can hear your questions, okay?
I know education is truly incredible, and it moves people beyond what we can ever expect, but if we don't have homes to go to, what good is the education?
Second question, we can't always depend on government to help us as far as education is concerned. I do think--my wife is a teacher in an elementary school--it all has to start at home. We as parents have to educate our children on how to get educated; it starts at home. And I want to thank you for everything you've done for public education. Thank you again. But we all have to understand it kind of starts at home, as parents.
One last point I'll make about veterans, because it ties in with the overall theme of education: Working with our terrific Members of Congress here, we were able to pass the post-9/11 GI bill, which means that this generation of veterans is going to be able to benefit the same way my grandfather benefited when he came back from World War II, that he was going to be able to get his college education paid for. And by the way, we made it transferable to the spouses of veterans and their family members if they weren't going to use it, because military families make huge sacrifices as well, and oftentimes they don't get the service and the attention that they need. And this has been a huge priority of the First Lady, and it's something that I am very, very proud of. But we've got to keep on fighting for these changes. They don't come by themselves.
And you got to ask yourselves, what direction do I want this country to go in? Do I want to invest in our people, in our middle class and making it stronger, and our infrastructure and our education system and clean energy? Is that one vision, or are we just going to keep on doing the same things that got us into this mess in the first place?
So on a whole range of issues, my hope was, is that we could come together, Democrats and Republicans, to find practical, commonsense solutions to health care, to education, to energy issues, because although I'm a proud Democrat, I'm a prouder American. And I think all of us believe, regardless of our party affiliations, that this is a critical time, where we've got to solve big problems.
So there are a lot of things we've done well, but here's the broader point. I do think that there are a lot of good Republican ideas out there. In fact, there were a number of them that were incorporated in this health care bill. And my hope is, is that as we look forward, let's say on education or on energy, some of the things that we haven't yet finished, that we're going to have a greater spirit of cooperation after this next election.
My question is, what is your administration planning to do to improve comprehensive primary education and address college affordability?
There are two steps in terms of education. And keep in mind that what has made America the wealthiest, most successful country on Earth historically has been our commitment to education. We started the public school system very early in the century, and as a consequence we had more skilled workers than any nation on Earth, which meant that we were more productive than any nation on Earth. We then made a commitment, particularly after World War II with the GI bill, to massively expand our commitment to college education, and that meant we had more engineers and we had more scientists and that meant we had better technology, which meant that we were more productive and we could succeed in the global marketplace.
And what's happened in a generation is that our lead has slipped. We're now--we rank 21st when it comes to math education. We rank 25th when it comes to science. We used to be number one in the proportion of college graduates. We now rank ninth. And at an age where knowledge, skills, are the determinant of how successful we're going to be, unless we reverse that we're going to keep slipping behind economically to a lot of other countries. I mean, China is not playing for second place. Germany, South Korea--these are all countries that are investing massively in education. We've got to do the same thing.
And through something called Race to the Top, we've been inspiring reforms all across the country, using relatively little amounts of money, but we give them an incentive. We say, if you want some additional money for your school, we'll give it to you. But you've got to compete, show us that you're going to reform your education system so that our children are performing better. Now, that's at the K-12 level.
We're also emphasizing, by the way, math and science education, especially for women, young girls, and for minorities who oftentimes underperform in those fields. And we want to generate more math and science teachers, and we're getting the private sector to help us by paying for the training and the scholarships for more math and science teachers.
Ms. Cook. Hi, I'm fabulous. Thank you. I wanted to give you an idea, first of all, of some of our trending topics we've been seeing on Twitter. Pretty much number one for the last couple of days has been jobs, education in the second category there. LGBT issues have been kind of floating between third and fourth position, obviously a very, very important issue.
And so what we've said is for those young people, who didn't break any laws, they didn't have a choice when they came here, give them a chance by getting an education or serving in our military, having a series of standards that they have to meet in terms of showing good character. And if they do that, then give them a pathway for finally getting their paperwork straight and being full-fledged American citizens.
That's something I think we've got to avoid. We've got to be able to have a conversation and recognize we're all Americans; we all want the best for this country. We may have some disagreements in terms of how to get there, but all of us want to make sure that our economy is strong, that jobs are growing. All of us want to make sure that people aren't bankrupt when they get sick. All of us want to make sure that young people can afford an education.
That's why we've got to prioritize education going forward. Thank you.
THE PRESIDENT: You know, let me say this, Piolín. You know, 'cause a lot of people say this to me, they say, oh, you know, you have a really hard job. You know, you have all these problems, everybody expects you to solve them right away, people are criticizing you and I say, you know what? The problems that I have are not nothing compared to the problems that people have every day if their losing their job, they may lose their mortgage, they're trying to figure out how to finance their kids' college education. This is a great privilege for me to be president and to be able to help people as much as I can and I get frustrated that we're not moving as quickly as I'd like. I'm not getting as much cooperation sometimes as I want in Congress, but I feel confident that we're making progress. I'll just give you one example. You know, we were able, because of the work that we did, to change how we finance the Student Loan Program to take tens of billions of dollars that used to go to the banks that are now going to Pell Grants and student loans. Millions of children, a lot of young Latino students, are now getting scholarships and grants that didn't get it before and are able to aspire to college. When you get something like that done, you feel good in the morning when you wake up because you know, okay, I still have a long check list of things I have to do, but at least we're making a difference right now.
But having said all that, we have made a lot of progress over the last 18 months that, from a historical perspective, you know, ranks up there with any legislative session we've seen in history. And we're going to have to continue to make some progress on things like energy, which didn't get done, on immigration reform, that did not get done. And most importantly we've just got to do a lot more work in terms of generating the kind of jobs that ensure we've got a growing middle class and that people are able to live out the American dream, because right now I think there are a lot of folks who are worried that if we don't make serious investments in education, in energy, in infrastructure, in research and development, that we're going to start falling behind. [applause]
The President: Look, the — I'm a pretty stubborn guy when it comes to, on the one hand, trying to get cooperation. I don't give up just because I didn't get cooperation on this issue; I'll try the next issue. If the Republicans don't agree with me on fiscal policy, maybe they'll agree with me on infrastructure. If they don't agree with me on infrastructure, I'll try to see if they agree with me on education.

In that sense, there's not a breaking point for me. There are some core principles that I think are important for not just me to stick with but for the country to stick with. So if the Republicans say we need to cut our investments in education, at a time when we know that our success as a nation is largely going to depend on how well trained our workforce is, I'm going to say no. And there are going to be areas where, after working very hard, we just can't find compromise and I'm going to be standing my ground, then essentially we debate it before the American people.

The President: Well, I mean, the problem with labels is everybody thinks they mean different things. So I would define myself as a strong progressive in the sense that I believe in that essential American Dream that everybody gets a chance to make it if they're willing to work hard, that government has a role to play in ensuring opportunity by making sure kids get a decent education and can afford to go to college; that workers are able to train and retrain for the jobs of the future; that we're building strong infrastructure; that we are using our diplomacy alongside our military to protect our national security; that we believe in the Bill of Rights and we actually act on it, even when it's inconvenient; that we are promoting the equal treatment of citizens under the law.

That doesn't mean that our business is finished. I am very disappointed Congress wasn't able to pass the " DREAM Act" so we can stop punishing kids for the actions of their parents and allow them to serve in the military or earn an education and contribute their talents to the country where they grew up.
I'm also disappointed we weren't able to come together around a budget to fund our Government over the long term. I expect we'll have a robust debate about this when we return from the holidays, a debate that will have to answer an increasingly urgent question, and that is, how do we cut spending that we don't need while making investments that we do need, investments in education, research and development, innovation, and the things that are essential to grow our economy over the long run, create jobs, and compete with every other nation in the world? I look forward to hearing from folks on both sides of the aisle about how we can accomplish that goal.
I think that we're still going to have disagreements in terms of spending priorities. It's vital for us to make investments in education and research and development--all those things that create an innovative economy--while at the same time cutting those programs that just aren't working. And there are going to be debates between the parties on those issues.
And that means we've got to focus on education, that means we have to focus on research and development, we have to focus on innovation. We have to make sure that in every sector, from manufacturing to clean energy to high-tech to biotech, that we recognize the private sector is going to be the driving force. And what the Government can do is to make sure that we are a good partner with them, that we're a facilitator, that in some cases we're a catalyst when it's a fledgling industry.
If we say that education is going to be the single most important determinant for our children's success and this country's success in the 21st century, we can't have schools that are laying off so many teachers that they start going to 4 days a week, as they've done in Hawaii, for example.
Half a century ago, when the Soviets beat us into space with the launch of a satellite called Sputnik, we had no idea how we would beat them to the Moon. The science wasn't even there yet. NASA didn't exist. But after investing in better research and education, we didn't just surpass the Soviets, we unleashed a wave of innovation that created new industries and millions of new jobs.
Think about it. Over the next 10 years, nearly half of all new jobs will require education that goes beyond a high school education. And yet as many as a quarter of our students aren't even finishing high school. The quality of our math and science education lags behind many other nations. America has fallen to ninth in the proportion of young people with a college degree. And so the question is whether all of us, as citizens and as parents, are willing to do what's necessary to give every child a chance to succeed.
Race to the Top is the most meaningful reform of our public schools in a generation. For less than 1 percent of what we spend on education each year, it has led over 40 States to raise their standards for teaching and learning. And these standards were developed, by the way, not by Washington, but by Republican and Democratic Governors throughout the country. And Race to the Top should be the approach we follow this year as we replace No Child Left Behind with a law that's more flexible and focused on what's best for our kids.
Of course, the education race doesn't end with a high school diploma. To compete, higher education must be within the reach of every American. That's why we've ended the unwarranted taxpayer subsidies that went to banks and used the savings to make college affordable for millions of students. And this year, I ask Congress to go further and make permanent our tuition tax credit, worth $10,000 for 4 years of college. It's the right thing to do.
If we take these steps, if we raise expectations for every child and give them the best possible chance at an education, from the day they are born until the last job they take, we will reach the goal that I set 2 years ago: By the end of the decade, America will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world.
One last point about education: Today, there are hundreds of thousands of students excelling in our schools who are not American citizens. Some are the children of undocumented workers, who had nothing to do with the actions of their parents. They grew up as Americans and pledge allegiance to our flag, and yet they live every day with the threat of deportation. Others come here from abroad to study in our colleges and universities. But as soon as they obtain advanced degrees, we send them back home to compete against us. It makes no sense.
All these investments--in innovation, education, and infrastructure--will make America a better place to do business and create jobs. But to help our companies compete, we also have to knock down barriers that stand in the way of their success.
Now, I recognize that some in this Chamber have already proposed deeper cuts, and I'm willing to eliminate whatever we can honestly afford to do without. But let's make sure that we're not doing it on the backs of our most vulnerable citizens. And let's make sure that what we're cutting is really excess weight. Cutting the deficit by gutting our investments in innovation and education is like lightening an overloaded airplane by removing its engine. It may make you feel like you're flying high at first, but it won't take long before you feel the impact. [Laughter]
THE PRESIDENT: -- housing, education, you name it -- that they are directed specially to making sure that these veterans are served.
THE PRESIDENT: All right. Well, a couple of points here. First of all, the reason they're in huge debt is because the cost of their college educations are so high.
GROVE: Well, you mentioned education as an area that would not get cut. Let's go to the category of education. This question comes from a charter school in -- [inaudible].
Q: How do you plan on addressing these social and economic disparities that currently exist in minority communities? In particular, what is your plan to close the pervasive achievement gap in education for American minorities today?
THE PRESIDENT: Well, the first thing that we've got to remember -- and I said this at the State of the Union -- is that nothing government does replaces the importance of parents in education. And so all of us, regardless of our station, our race, where -- what region of the country we're coming from, if we're parents, we've got to step up our game in working with our kids to learn -- reading to them, turning off the TV, making sure they're doing their homework.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, keep in mind, Race to the Top only costs 1 percent of what we spend overall on education.
But the most important thing we have to do is to make sure that young people like Tom are getting the best education possible; that young engineers and scientists, they have the resources to -- to create new products and new technologies; that we've got an economy that's dynamic and rewards success, but also an economy that benefits from the best transportation systems, the best Internet systems, the best roads and bridges and airports. And -- and so, the -- the goal over the next couple of years is to make sure that, even as we're reducing our deficit, dealing with our debt, that we're still making some core investments that are going to prepare us for the future.
I reiterated that the United States accepts our shared responsibility for the drug violence. So to combat the southbound flow of guns and money, we are screening all southbound rail cargo, seizing many more guns bound for Mexico, and we are putting more gunrunners behind bars. And as part of our new drug control strategy, we are focused on reducing the demand for drugs through education, prevention, and treatment.
President Obama. All right. Let me deal with football first. [Laughter] You've got owners, most of whom are worth close to a billion dollars. You got players who are making millions of dollars. My working assumption at a time when people are having to cut back, compromise, and worry about making the mortgage and paying for their kids' college education is, is that the two parties should be able to work it out without the President of the United States intervening.
It means that on education, we can't just stop with the incredible work that Arne Duncan's done with Race to the Top; we've got to reform No Child Left Behind to make sure that not only is no child left behind, but every child gets ahead. And that means that we're going to have to--[Applause]--that means we're going to have to work hard this year and the next to try to forge a bipartisan consensus on how we recruit incredible new teachers and get them in the classroom and reinvigorate our schools across the country and make sure that higher education continues to be affordable.
Across the Americas, parents want their children to be able to run and play and know that they'll come home safely. Young people all desperately want an education. Fathers want the dignity that comes from work, and women want the same opportunities as their husbands. Entrepreneurs want the chance to start that new business. And people everywhere want to be treated with the respect to which every human being is entitled. These are the hopes--simple yet profound--that beat in the hearts of millions across the Americas.
I've said before, and I will repeat: As President, I've made it clear that the United States shares and accepts our share of responsibility for drug violence. After all, the demand for drugs, including in the United States, drives this crisis. And that's why we've developed a new drug control strategy that focused on reducing the demand for drugs through education and prevention and treatment. And I would point out that even during difficult fiscal times in the United States, we've proposed increasing our commitment to these efforts by some $10 billion this year alone.
Thanks to smart investments in education, rural development, and infrastructure, El Salvador has made gains in reducing poverty. And to build on this progress, El Salvador is one of the first four countries in the world in our Partnership for Growth, which is a key element of my administration's new approach to development.
And that's why emphasis on education and emphasizing social programs, giving young people other pathways has to be part of this overall program.
And something that is very important--and I'm pleased to hear that President Obama agrees with us--that the efforts that we make in repression and persecution of criminals is not going to do anything unless we take away from the criminals the fertile soil that they have found in this region. And this fertile soil is thanks to the fact that we have a lot of youngsters that are living in a situation of poverty and social exclusion, exclusion from the benefits and the services that the state should give them. And this is why I insisted with President Obama that we cannot continue offering our youngsters in El Salvador and the region, or go to the United States to find employment and entertaining and education opportunities that they don't find here, or to fall in the hands of the criminal gangs, especially the gangs.
And what I think that shows is that the entire region is much less interested in ideology, much less interested in left or right. It's interested in practical results. How can we solve problems to help kids get an education, help people support themselves and find a job, help businesses develop, help the entire region grow. And that's the kind of partnership that we want. You know, we still have specific programs that we're involved with here in El Salvador. You know, they received a millennium challenge grant that provides over $400 million to help this country develop. They are one of four countries that we've selected for a partnership for growth that will involve us working very closely with their economic team to find out what are the barriers to economic development in this country.
But the overall relationship with Mexico is actually very strong. The challenge is that drug cartels have gotten stronger. And President Calderon, rightly, is frustrated. So what I've said to him is, we have to share these burdens. We've got to make sure that we're investing in reducing demand in the United States, and I've budgeted $10 billion even in these hard fiscal times for drug education and prevention programs. We have to make sure that we are interdicting the flow of guns and cash to the south. It's not enough just to interdict drugs flowing north. And so, we've actually initiated a whole range of measures to make sure that we're reducing that southbound flow.
Univision Moderator Jorge Ramos. Mr. President, I have the first question. As a newscaster and as an anchor, I have to ask first. And I would like to ask something that everybody wants to know. You're going to talk about Libya. I don't know if you can give us something about the speech you're going to give later on for us to listen to it here at Univision. And we are going through a very difficult time. We're going through three different wars at the same time. And I was looking at the education budget in the country, and it really amazes me that every dollar that is being spent on education, we spend $10 for war and on the Department of Defense. Do we need to change that? What would you do?
The President. Jorge, with respect to Libya, I am going to be addressing this issue tonight, and I've already discussed it on several occasions, including on your program. Our involvement there is going to be limited both in time and in scope. But you're absolutely right that we have a very large defense budget. Some of that is necessitated by the size of our country and the particular special role that we play around the globe. But what is true is that over the last 10 years, the defense budget was going up much more quickly than our education budget.
And that's why in my 2012 budget, even though we have all these obligations--we're still in Afghanistan; I have ended the war in Iraq, and we've pulled 100,000 troops out, but we still have some commitments there--despite all that, my proposed budget still increases education spending by 10 percent, including 4 percent for non-college-related expenses. But we also increased the Pell grant program drastically so all these outstanding young people are going to have a better chance to go to college.
The President. Well, I appreciate the question. And I want to reiterate something that Mr. Conde said at the outset. This is an issue that's not just important for the Latino community here in the United States. This is an issue that is critical for the success of America generally, because we already have a situation where one out of five students are Latino in our schools. And when you look at those who are 10 years old or younger, it's actually one in four. So what this means is, is that our workforce is going to be more diverse. It is going to be, to a large percentage, Latino. And if our young people are not getting the kind of education they need, we won't succeed as a nation.
Now, here's what's also important, that 8 out of 10 future jobs are going to require more than a high school education. They're going to require some sort of higher education, whether it's a community college, a 4-year college, at the very least some job training and technical training, all of which means nobody--nobody--can drop out. We can't afford to have anybody here at Bell drop out. We can't have anybody drop out anywhere in the country.
Now, there are some things that we know work. To the extent that young people are getting a good start in school and aren't falling behind, they're less likely to drop out. So that's why it's important for us to invest in early childhood education. And my budget makes sure that we put more money into that. In K through 12, we've got to make sure that we've got the highest quality teachers. We have to make sure that we have parental involvement so that we are building a culture in our community. Everybody--businesses, philanthropies, churches, whoever these young people are interacting with--they've got to hear a message that they don't have any choice, they've got to graduate, and everybody's going to be behind them.
So those are all areas where parents can make a big difference. What we're trying to do as the Government is to make sure that we're providing more incentives for schools to improve their parental involvement programs. We're trying to make sure that schools are open and understand that it is up to them to provide a welcoming environment to parents so that they can be involved in their child's education.
And specifically with respect to young people who are coming to school and English may not be their native language, we've got to make sure that we continue to fund strong programs, both bilingual education programs, but also immersion programs that ensure that young people are learning English, but they're not falling behind in their subjects even as they are learning English.
Mr. Ramos. You mentioned minutes ago--you talked about the "DREAM Act." And we talked to parents and teachers, and one of the worst things in the educational system in the United States is that it allows them to go through elementary school and secondary studies--high school--but it doesn't allow them to go to college. And Marlene Aquino has a question regarding the "DREAM Act" and students that have been fighting--and they are saying publicly that they are undocumented and they are being at risk of deportation.
The President. Well, the irony is, is that California used to be famous for having the best school system in the country. And that wasn't that long ago. I mean, when I was a young person--I know I seem very old to all of you--but when I was a young person, back in the seventies, eighties, everybody would say what a great public school system California had, what a great university system California had. But unfortunately, most education funding is done at the State level. And in many States, what's happened is that there have been various laws put in place that limit the ability to raise money for schools, partly by capping property taxes.
But what's important, I think, for everyone to understand is this is typically a decision that's made at the State level. And so in each of the States--wherever you're watching, in Arizona, in New Mexico, in California, in Maryland--whatever State you're in, you should be pressing your State legislatures and your Governors to make sure that they are properly prioritizing education when it comes to the State budget, because just as a country's going to succeed because it's got the best workers, the same is going to be true in States.
This is where philanthropies can make a big difference. This is where churches can make a big difference. Because there's no reason why the community can't also mobilize to support parents to make sure that they are able to take the time to meet with teachers and support the overall process of education.
The President. Well, one of the things that we've already done in my first 2 years, as part of the Recovery Act, was to put several billion additional dollars into Head Start programs and early childhood education programs.
The Latino community is a young population, and so there are a lot of young kids. So they need high-quality early childhood education, high-quality daycare, high-quality Head Start programs, more than just about any other community. Unfortunately, actually, they are underrepresented in these programs, and we need to do more to provide that kind of support. So in our new budget we're also putting additional resources into early childhood education.
So what I want to do is--one thing I never want to see happen is schools that are just teaching to the test. Because then you're not learning about the world, you're not learning about different cultures, you're not learning about science, you're not learning about math. All you're learning about is how to fill out a little bubble on an exam and the little tricks that you need to do in order to take a test. And that's not going to make education interesting to you. And young people do well in stuff that they're interested in. They're not going to do as well if it's boring.
The President. Well, first of all, I just want to thank again Univision for hosting this town hall. Part of the reason why we felt this is so important is because the Latino community in this country will be a key for our future success. And all the young people who are sitting here are going to be a key to our success. And that means that everybody has to be involved in this project of lifting up graduation rates, lifting up performance in things like math and science, making sure that young people are getting education beyond high school so that they are prepared for the careers of the future.
And what I want to say is that the Government can do its part. We can increase funding for education. We can make college more affordable through grant programs and loan programs. But we can't do it alone. Ultimately, everybody has to be involved, and that includes the students here.
And I just want to say to all the young people here: This is a competitive world now, and you can't expect to be able to just find a job just because you're willing to work. If you haven't prepared through a good education, you are going to be trapped in low-end jobs. And so you've got to bring an attitude of hard work and pursuing excellence each and every day. That's what you have to bring to the classroom. That's what we need as a country. And if we do--if we all work together, then I'm confident that not only is the Latino community going to succeed, but the American family is going to thrive and succeed in the 21st century.
Mr. Ramos. Mr. President, and lastly I would like--wanted to tell you, there are more than 50 million Hispanics, and you are the first African American President, with great education, of course. And we hope that we have the first Latino President soon. Thank you for being here.
And that has to translate itself through our Government in investments in education and investments in infrastructure and investments in science, and a willingness to make tough decisions about our budget, and willingness to make our investments in environmental protection. That all these things we do because--not out of charity--but because it makes our lives better to live in a country that is fair and just and provides an opportunity to everybody.
So make no mistake, because of you, we've been able to make real progress over the last few years. Because of you, we were able to prevent another Great Depression. Because of you, we're making the most meaningful education reforms in a generation through a competition called Race to the Top, raising teachers up and raising learning standards in schools and States across America.
With your help, we'll attract new jobs and new businesses to our shores. We'll make sure America isn't just competing, but we're competing to win in this economy. With your help, we're going to make sure all our kids are ready for college, all our kids are ready for careers. Because a world-class education is the single most important factor in whether America succeeds in the 21st century.
Last week, we were able to prevent a Government shutdown. And the reason we were able to do it was because we agreed to spending cuts, but we insisted on protecting investments in things like education and medical research. But now we've got to rein in this long-term deficit and deal with this long-term debt because it threatens our financial stability. We won't be able to do all those good things if we don't get our fiscal house in order.
Mr. Zuckerberg. Yes, let's start off. So let's start off with the conversation about the debt. Right? So I understand that yesterday morning you had a town hall in Virginia where you talked about your framework not only for resolving the short-term budget issues, but the longer term debt. And you spent some time talking about tax reform and some cost cutting, but you also spent a lot of time talking about things that you didn't think that we could cut: in education, infrastructure, and clean energy.
We can still make investments in education, so we've already expanded the Pell grant program so that more young people can go to college. We're investing more in STEM education: math and science and technology education. We can still make those investments. We can still rebuild our roads and our bridges and invest in high-speed rail and invest in the next generation of broadband and wireless and make sure everybody has access to the Internet. We can do all those things while still bringing down the deficit medium term.
What the Republicans right now are saying is, number one, they can't agree to any increases in taxes, which means we'd have to cut--out of that $4 trillion, all of it would come from education, transportation, areas that I think are critical for our long-term future.
So you're right that it's tricky. Any--folks around here are used to the hills in San Francisco, and you've driven--I don't know if they still have clutch cars around here. Anybody ever driven a clutch car? [Laughter] I mean, you got to sort of tap and--well, that's sort of what we faced in terms of the economy, right? We got to hit the accelerator, but we've got to also make sure that we don't gun it; we can't let the car slip backwards. And so what we're trying to do, then, is put together a debt and deficit plan that doesn't slash spending so drastically that we can't still make investments in education, that we can't still make investments in infrastructure, all of which would help the economy grow.
So what his budget proposal does is not only hold income tax flat, he actually wants to further reduce taxes for the wealthy, further reduce taxes for corporations, not pay for those, and in order to make his numbers work, cut 70 percent out of our clean energy budget, cut 25 percent out of our education budget, cut transportation budgets by a third. I guess you could call that bold. I would call it shortsighted.
Mr. Zuckerberg. All right, the next one's from the web. We've got a question from Kwame Simmons from Orlando, Florida. And he asks: "I strongly believe that education is the greatest equalizer. With so many problems plaguing our current system, is it possible to examine a complete overhaul of the system so that it addresses the needs of modern students?"
And before you jump in, I just want to say, as someone who has spent a bunch of time researching education and who cares about this, I think that the Race to the Top stuff that you guys have done is one of the most underappreciated and most important things that your administration has done.
It used to be that the argument around education always revolved around the left saying we just need more money and the right saying we should just blow up the system because public schools aren't doing a good job. And what we are now seeing is people recognizing we need both money and reform. It's not an either-or proposition, it's a both-and proposition.
What we did was, we took about 1 percent of the total spending on education and we said, to get this 1 percent, show us that you're reforming the system. It's almost--it's like a competition model. And so every State, every school district could apply. And you had to show us that you had a good plan to retrain teachers and recruit and do good professional development so we've got the best teachers possible.
A couple of things that we know work: The most important thing to a good education is making sure we've got a good teacher in front of that classroom. And so providing more support for teachers, recruiting the best and brightest into teaching, making sure that they're compensated, but also making sure that they're performing, that's hugely important.
So we're starting to see real progress on the ground, and I'm optimistic that we can actually, before the 2012 election, potentially have a Federal education law that will embody some of the best information that we have about how to initiate good school reform.
Now, last point I'll make on this: Government alone can't do it. One of the things every time I come to Silicon Valley that I'm inspired by, but I'm also frustrated by, is how many smart people are here--but also frustrated that I always hear stories about how we can't find enough engineers, we can't find enough computer programmers. You know what, that means our education system is not working the way it should, and that's got to start early.
We've got to do such a better job when it comes to STEM education. And that's one of the reasons, by the way, that we had our first science fair at the White House in a very long time, just because we want to start making science cool. I want everybody to feel the same way that they did--[Applause]--I want people to feel the same way about the next big energy breakthrough or the next big Internet breakthrough--I want people to feel the same way they felt about the Moon launch, that that's how we're going to stay competitive for the future. And that's why these investments in education are so important.
But, as I said, Government alone can't do it. There's got to be a shift in American culture, where once again we buckle down and we say, this stuff's important. And it's--that's why, Mark, the work you're doing in Newark, for example, the work that folks like the Gates Foundation are doing in philanthropic investments in best practices in education, especially around math and science training, are going to be so important.
So what we want to do is to start changing how folks are reimbursed. Let's take a hospital. We want to give--this is sort of like Race to the Top, what Mark was talking about in education. We want to be able to say to a hospital, if you do a really good job reducing infection rates in the hospital, which kill tens of thousands of people across America every year and are a huge cause for readmission rates, and we know that hospitals can drastically reduce those reinfection rates just by simple protocols of how employees are washing their hands and how they're moving from room to room and so forth--there are hospitals who have done it--if we can say to a hospital, you'll get a bonus for that, Medicare will reimburse you for instituting these simple procedures, that saves the whole system money.
So when it comes to energy, when it comes to immigration, when it comes to getting our deficit under control in a balanced and smart way, when it comes to improving our math and science education, when it comes to reinvesting in our infrastructure, we've just got a lot more work to do.
But let me tell you what I won't do. I will not reduce our deficit by sacrificing the things that have always made America great, the things that have made Americans prosper. I will not sacrifice our investment in education. I won't sacrifice scholarships for our students or medical research for our scientists. I won't sacrifice the safety of our highways or our airports. I will not sacrifice our investment in clean energy at a time when our dependence on foreign oil is causing Americans so much pain at the pump. I won't sacrifice clean air and clean water. I will not sacrifice America's future.
So we've made enormous progress, but those letters tell me that we haven't made enough. We've still got a lot of work to do. We've got a lot of work to do to continue to lower the unemployment rate and grow the economy. We've got a lot of work to do to make sure that we get control over a deficit and debt that is a serious threat to our long-term future. And we've got to do it in a way that ensures that we're making the investments that allow us to be competitive in the 21st century: investments in education, investments in infrastructure, investments in basic research and science, which have always been the hallmark of a dynamic American economy.
We're not going to pull up the ladder behind us. I'm not going to reduce our deficit by sacrificing the things that always made us great as a people. I'm not going to sacrifice investments in education. I'm not going to make scholarships harder to get and more expensive for young people. I'm not going to sacrifice the safety of our highways or our airports. I'm not going to sacrifice clean air and clean water. I'm not going to sacrifice clean energy at a time when we need to free ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and folks are getting killed at the pump. I'm not going to sacrifice America's future.
As someone who's only here because of the chances my education gave me, I couldn't agree more. Opportunity changes everything. America will only be as strong in this new century as the opportunities that we provide you, the opportunities that we provide all our young people--Latino, Black, White, Asian, Native American, everybody. America will only be as strong as our pursuit of scientific research and our leadership in technology and innovation. And I believe that community colleges like this one are critical pathways to the middle class that equip students with the skills and the education necessary to compete and win in this 21st-century economy. And that's why I've made community colleges a centerpiece of my education agenda, along with helping more students afford college. I couldn't be prouder of the work we've done in community colleges. And your accomplishment today is vital to America reclaiming the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by 2020. So I am proud of you. I am proud of you.
And it's a day we commit ourselves to advancing the aspirations of all Latinos and reaffirm the ideals that we share as Americans. That means improving the education that we provide to our children, strengthening the social safety net that we build for our seniors and the poor and the sick, living up to our values as a nation of immigrants that built this country into the economic powerhouse that it is and the beacon of hope that it is around the world.
I mean, one CEO had this to say about reform: "American ingenuity is a product of the openness and diversity of this society. Immigrants have made America great as the world leader in business, in science, higher education, and innovation." You know who that leader was? Rupert Murdoch, who owns FOX News and is an immigrant himself. I don't know if you're familiar with Rupert Murdoch's views, but let's just say he doesn't have an Obama sticker on his car. [Laughter] But he agrees with me on this.
And we should stop punishing innocent young people for the actions of their parents. We should stop denying them the chance to earn an education or serve in the military. And that's why we need to pass the "DREAM Act." Now, we passed the "DREAM Act" through the House last year when Democrats were in control. But even though it received a majority of votes in the Senate, it was blocked when several Republicans who had previously supported the "DREAM Act" voted no.
We all need to share in the sacrifice, but we're not going to reduce our deficit by sacrificing the things that have always made us prosper. I'm not going to sacrifice our investment in education. I will not sacrifice scholarships to students. I will not sacrifice medical research for our scientists. I will not sacrifice our highways and our airports, making sure they're safe. I will not sacrifice investments in clean energy at a time when our dependence on foreign oil is causing folks so much pain at the pump. I'm not going to sacrifice America's future.
And in order for us to make sure that that opportunity is available for everyone, it means we're going to have to make ourselves more competitive, because we now face a 21st-century economy that is not like the economy that we grew up in. And it means we're going to have to make investments in education and step up our game and increase our college graduation rates. It means we've got to rebuild our infrastructure. We used to have the best infrastructure in the world, and we no longer do. And that will put us over the long term at a competitive disadvantage. And by the way, we can put a lot of people to work, doing the work that America needs done, rebuilding roads and bridges, but also broadband lines and a smart grid and high-speed rail.
We've made the largest investment in education in our history. We haven't just put more money into our education system, but we've demanded accountability and reform, and in some cases, broken some china within the Democratic Party, saying that this is too important for us to be held back by dogma and ideology.
And I said on that night that this wasn't the end, but rather, it was the beginning. Because what we understood even then was that our country had reached a crossroads. That we had a series of decisions that were going to help determine the future not just of our children, but our grandchildren and our great-grandchildren. That we were living in an age in which the world had shrunk; it had become more interconnected than ever before. And that if we did not make some critical decisions now, if we stopped just kicking the can down the road, but we decided that we were actually going to seize the moment and transform our education system and finally fix our health care system and deal with our energy policy so that we were no longer subject to the whims of the spot oil market, and if we didn't transform our foreign policy to recognize the visions and dreams of billions of people around the world who were yearning to be free--if we didn't make some fundamental changes, that we might be the first generation that was passing on an America that was less hopeful, that was less generous, and that all those people who felt the American Dream slipping out of their fingers, that somehow that loss of hope would continue.
We made the largest Federal investment in education in our history, but we didn't just put more money in. We decided we were finally going to deliver on reform and help catalyze reforms in 40 States all across the country to make sure that schools are doing right by every single student, K through 12. And we also made sure that young people are able to afford to go to college, so we took away billions of dollars of subsidies that were going to banks and put those in the student loan system so that millions more young people were able to go to college without taking on tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of debt.
We--I gave a budget address a while back, and a lot of people reported on the numbers and the debt and the deficit and why this is so important. And let me tell you, we as Democrats, we as progressives, need to be just as concerned about the debt as anybody else. Because that's how we will be able to move our vision forward--investing in education, investing in infrastructure, investing in clean energy--if we've got a government that lives within its means. So we've got to be concerned about that.
But here's what I won't do. I will not reduce our deficit by sacrificing the things that have always made America prosper. I will not sacrifice our investments in education. I will not sacrifice scholarships for our students. I will not sacrifice medical research for our scientists. I will not sacrifice the safety of our highways or airports or our food supply or clean air or clean water. I will not sacrifice our investments in clean energy at a time when our dependence on foreign oil is causing Americans so much pain at the pump. I will not sacrifice America's future. There are more than one way to mortgage America's future.
If I'm driving down the street and I pass a school and I know in that school, young people, no matter how poor they are, no matter what they look like, they're getting a great education, that makes me smile. That makes my life better.
We've made incredible progress on education, helping students to finance their college educations, but we still don't have enough engineers. We still don't have enough scientists. We still lag behind other countries when it comes to training our young people for the jobs, the high-skilled jobs that are going to provide high wages and allow them to support a family.
So we've got more work to do, investing in our education system and making sure that our infrastructure is built and we're putting people back to work and helping the housing market recover and dealing with our budget in a way that allows us to once again live within our means, but doing so in a way that is consistent with our values.
We made a huge investment in basic research and science and a huge investment in making sure that our young people get the best education possible, but we still don't have enough engineers and scientists, and our young people are still not performing at the levels they need to in order to compete in a 21st-century economy.
And so I'm extraordinarily proud of the economic record that we were able to produce over the first 2 1/2 years, but having said all that, the economy is still so tough for so many people around the country. The hole that was dug was so deep. And most importantly, the reasons that I decided to run for President in the first place still had not been fully addressed. Because the fact is, is that even before this financial crisis, wages and incomes had flatlined for most Americans. Those at the very top had seen themselves do very well, but the bottom 95 percent, the bottom 90 percent, they were treading water at a time when their cost of health care and cost of college education, cost of groceries, cost of gasoline all were going up. And that was before the crisis hit. And now they've got to worry about homes that have lost value and businesses that are just barely getting by.
And what that means is that what we've begun we had to finish. We've begun to reform our education system, and thanks to programs like Race to the Top, we're not just putting more money into the schools. We are saying to schools and States and local school districts, if you reform, if you get rid of the dogmas of the left or the right and you focus on student achievement and how to get the best possible teachers at the front of the classroom and we're rewarding excellence and we are holding ourselves accountable, you know what, there's no reason why we can't make sure that we have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world and make sure that every single one of our young people are equipped to compete in a 21st-century economy.
And we expanded national service for young people so they could participate and contribute into the building of America. We made the largest investment in clean energy in our history and the largest investment in education and the--we changed the student loan system so that we weren't given billions of dollars to banks, but we were giving them directly to students.
We still have so much more work to do on education. We have made great strides, but we have to hit the goal that I set that once again we will have the highest proportion of college graduates of any country in the world and every single young person who is willing to apply themselves can afford to go to college without taking on hundreds of thousands of dollars of debt. That is still something that we've got to accomplish.
But what I've also said is we can't stop investing in the things that are going to make us competitive in the future. We can't stop investing in education. We can't stop investing in medical research. We can't stop investing in building our infrastructure, all the things that help make us the greatest country in the world. We cannot stop caring for our seniors and our--the disabled and the most vulnerable in our society.
We worked so hard in 2008 because we believed that we have to define our success not just by stock prices or corporate profits, but whether ordinary folks can find a good job, whether they can afford a middle class life, whether they can pay the mortgage and take care of their kids and save some money for their child's college education or their own retirement and maybe have a little left over to go to a movie or dinner or even a play--since we're in New York. [Laughter]
But I won't reduce our deficit by sacrificing the education of our young people. We can't stop medical research being done by our scientists. We can't stop building the infrastructure that made this country great. I'm not going to sacrifice clean energy at a time when our dependence on foreign oil has caused Americans so much pain at the pump. That doesn't make any sense. In other words, I will not sacrifice America's future.
There are a lot of folks out there who are still struggling with the effects of the recession. Many people are still looking for work or looking for a job that pays more. Families are wondering how they deal with a broken refrigerator or a busted transmission or how they're going to finance their kids' college education, and they're also worrying about the possibility of layoffs.
But everyone also knows that we'll need to do more to close the deficit. We can't get to the $4 trillion in savings that we need by just cutting the 12 percent of the budget that pays for things like medical research and education funding and food inspectors and the weather service. And we can't just do it by making seniors pay more for Medicare. So we're going to need to look at the whole budget, as I said several months ago. And we've got to eliminate waste wherever we find it and make some tough decisions about worthy priorities.
So the bottom line is this: Any agreement to reduce our deficit is going to require tough decisions and balanced solutions. And before we ask our seniors to pay more for health care, before we cut our children's education, before we sacrifice our commitment to the research and innovation that will help create more jobs in the economy, I think it's only fair to ask an oil company or a corporate jet owner that has done so well to give up that tax break that no other business enjoys. I don't think that's real radical. I think the majority of Americans agree with that.
And these folks are counting on us. They desperately want to believe that their leadership is thinking about them and not playing games. And I think that if all the leadership here in Washington has the faces and the stories of those families in mind, then we will solve this debt limit issue, we will put in place steps like a payroll tax cut and infrastructure development, we'll continue to fund education, we'll hold true to our commitment to our seniors.
Now, what does that mean? It means that we're going to have to improve our education system. And I know that Mayor Nutter and others have struggled this--with this for many years. We are making extraordinary progress thanks to as good of a Secretary of Education as I think we've ever seen in Arne Duncan, and we're starting to hold schools accountable, giving them more resources in exchange for more reform. But we've got a long way to go. That's not a project that we can finish in 2, 2 1/2 years.
And the reason I thought this was an important question is, as all of you know, we are going through a spirited debate here in Washington, but it's important to get the whole country involved in making a determination about what are the programs that can help us grow, can create jobs, improve our education system, maintain our clean air and clean water, and what are those things that are a waste that we shouldn't be investing in because they're not helping us grow or create jobs or creating new businesses. And that debate is going to be heating up over the next couple of weeks, so I'd love to hear from the American people, see what thoughts they have.
Mr. Dorsey. You mentioned education. There's a lot of questions coming about education and its impact on the economy. This one in particular is from a curator who is pulling from a student in Ohio named Dustin: "Higher ed is necessary for a stronger economy, but for some middle class Americans it's becoming too expensive. What can be done?"
The President. Well, here is some good news. We've already done something that is very significant, and people may not know. As part of a higher education package that we passed last year, what we were able to do was to take away subsidies that were going to banks for serving as middlemen in the student loan program and funnel that to help young people, through Pell grants and lower rates on student loans. And so there are millions of students who are getting more affordable student loans and grants as a consequence of the steps that we've already taken. This is about tens of billions of dollars' worth of additional Federal dollars that were going to banks are now going to students directly.
I do think that the universities still have a role in trying to keep their costs down. And I think that it's important. Even if we've got better student loan programs, more grants, if the costs keep on going up, then we'll never have enough money, you'll never get enough help to avoid taking on these huge debts. And so working with university presidents to try to figure out, where can you cut cost--of course, it may mean that the food in the cafeteria is a little worse and the gym is not as fancy. But I think all of us have to figure out a way to make sure that higher education is accessible for everybody.
So what I'm hoping to see over the next couple of weeks is people put their dogmas aside, their sacred cows aside, they come together, and they say, here's a sensible approach that reduces our deficit, makes sure that Government is spending within its means, but also continues to make investments in education, in clean energy, and basic research that are going to preserve our competitive advantage going forward.
Mr. Dorsey. So 10 percent of our questions now are about education, and this one was surfaced from our curator in California by Marcia: "Public education here in California is falling apart. Not graduating enough skilled workers or smart citizens. Privatization looming?"
Every time we've made a public investment in education, it has paid off many times over. For us now to give short shrift to education when the world is more complex than ever and it's a knowledge-based society and companies locate based on whether they've got skilled workforces or not, that makes no sense.
And so we've got to get our priorities straight here. It is important for us to have a healthy business climate, to try to keep taxes low, to make sure that we're not spending on things that don't work. It's important that we get a good bang for the buck in education. And so my administration has pushed more reform more vigorously across the country through things like Race to the Top than most previous administrations have been able to accomplish. So we don't just need more money, we need more reform.
And I think that those States that are going to do well and those countries that do well are the ones that are going to continue to be committed to making education a priority.
The President. No, the--what we've said is let's make permanent the Bush tax cuts for low- and moderate-income folks, people in--for the 98 percent of people who frankly have not seen their wages go up or their incomes go up over the last decade. They don't have a lot of room; they're already struggling to meet the rising cost of health care and education and gas prices and food prices.
Mr. Dorsey. Our next response from Elizabeth in Chicago: "Stop giving money to countries that waste it--Pakistan. Keep military, share the wealth between branches, and don't cut education."
Mr. Dorsey. So our next response--we have about 9 minutes left and four more responses--this one from Tammy: "Cut military spending on oil subsidies, and keep education investments."
And so I'm committed to reducing the defense budget, but as Commander in Chief, one of the things that we have to do is make sure that we do it in a thoughtful way that's guided by our security and our strategic needs. And I think we can accomplish that. And the nice thing about the defense budget is it's so big, it's so huge, that a 1-percent reduction is the equivalent of the education budget. Not--I'm exaggerating, but it's so big that you can make relatively modest changes to defense that end up giving you a lot of head room to fund things like basic research or student loans or things like that.
But the bottom line is that our core values of responsibility, opportunity, making sure that the American Dream is alive and well so that anybody who is willing to put in the time and the effort and the energy are able to get a good education in this society, find a job that pays a living wage, that they're able to send their kids to college without going broke, that they've got basic health care, they're going to be able to retire with some dignity and some respect, that that opportunity is open to anybody regardless of race or religion or sexual orientation or--that that basic principle, that's what holds us together. That's what makes us Americans.
What I told the gathering at the White House was we need your voice. Your country needs you. Our American family will only be as strong as our growing Latino community. And so we're going to take these conversations on the road and keep working with you, because for more than four decades, NCLR has fought for opportunities for Latinos from city centers to farm fields. And that fight for opportunity--the opportunity to get a decent education, the opportunity to find a good job, the opportunity to make of our lives what we will--has never been more important than it is today.
Because--I just want to talk about this for a second, because it has a potential impact on everybody here and all the communities you serve--if we don't address the debt that's already on our national credit card, it will leave us unable to invest in things like education, to protect vital programs.
We're keeping our promise to give our young people every opportunity to succeed. NCLR has always organized its work around the principle that the single most important investment we can make is in our children's education and that if we let our Latino students fall behind, we will all fall behind. I believe that.
We have a system right now that allows the best and the brightest to come study in America and then tells them to leave, set up the next great company someplace else. We have a system that tolerates immigrants and businesses that breaks the rules and punishes those that follow the rules. We have a system that separates families, and punishes innocent young people for their parents' actions by denying them the chance to earn an education or contribute to our economy or serve in our military. These are the laws on the books.
So I think that asking people to get engaged because the future is going to be determined by this election. We've already seen over this last week just how different the visions are of the two parties in terms of where we should take this country. I think it's very clear who's going to be looking out for working families, who wants to invest in things like education, who wants to make sure that we've got strong social insurance programs like Medicare and Social Security that are going to look after people, but also how do we maintain those in a responsible way.
And we're going to invest in clean energy, because we're tired of being dependent on foreign oil. So we want wind turbines and electric cars made right here in the United States of America. And we're going to increase our investment in basic research to find cures for cancer and Alzheimer's. And we're going to revamp our education system so it starts working for every child and not just some children.
It's also about making sure we've got the best education system in the world, that we've got the best scientists and engineers and mathematicians in the world, making sure that we prize our diversity, making sure that we've got a social safety net for the aged and the infirm and our children. That's part of what makes us a great nation.
And that starts with giving our children the best opportunity to succeed, something I know Latino families are focused on every single day. Because if we're going to outbuild and outinnovate every other country on Earth, the most important thing we can do is make sure that every single young person in this country has an opportunity to thrive. The most important investment we can make is in education.
That's why we launched the Race to the Top initiative, which now reaches almost one-quarter of our country's Latino students, to help encourage schools to do the very best with our kids: identify and support students before they drop out, implement effective bilingual education programs, make English language learners a priority.
That's heartbreaking. It's heartbreaking to see innocent young people denied the right to earn an education or serve in our military because of their parents' action and because of the actions of a few politicians in Washington. It's heartbreaking to see these incredibly bright, gifted people barred from contributing to our country and to our economy.
And so this "American Jobs Act" says, at a time when we have to rebuild our infrastructure to be competitive in the 21st century and we've got all these construction workers who are out of work, let's put them to work rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our schools and laying our broadband lines and making sure that--[applause]. Let's put teachers back in the classroom at a time when we know that nothing is more important for lasting employment than an education. Let's give businesses more incentives to hire our veterans and long-term unemployed. And let's keep taxes low for small businesses, and let's make sure that taxes don't go up for middle class families at a time when they're still very strained and very stressed.
That means we have to build on the education reforms that we've already initiated to make college more affordable. We still have not done enough to have an energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil. We've done a lot. We've doubled fuel efficiency standards on cars, probably the biggest impact in environmental action over the last 30 years. But we're still wasting too much energy that we can't afford to waste in this new environment.
And so a lot is at stake in this election, even more than in 2008. Now, this is going to be a tough election because the economy is tough and people are frustrated. And so we've got to understand what's at stake. There are two contrasting visions of where America needs to go. And one vision says that we've got to pull and abandon our commitments to the aging and the vulnerable, and we can't afford to invest in education the way we historically have, and we can't afford to rebuild our infrastructure. We're destined to having a smaller vision of what we can do together. And the other is a big, ambitious, bold, optimistic vision of an America in which we are investing in the future, we're investing in our people. We're making certain that we're making the tough decisions to be competitive in the 21st century, and we're doing it in a way that is fair, that everybody shares in opportunity and everybody shares in responsibility. That's what's at stake.
And that's why this country gave millions of returning heroes, including my grandfather, the opportunity to study on the GI bill. Because they understood, you know what, if they succeed, then everybody succeeds. If ordinary folks have an education, if they've got a shot, then everybody has got a shot. Businesses will do well. The wealthy will do well. People will rise out of poverty. That's the story of America. That's what we're fighting for.
We need to work short term, and we're going to need to work long term. Because after we pass this jobs bill, we're still going to have work to do. We're still going to have to reform our education system. We're still going to have to make sure that we've got an immigration system in this country that is fair and, yes, secures our borders, but also makes sure that folks who are here aren't living in the shadows. We've still got to make sure that we have an energy policy that is smart for our pocketbooks and frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and make sure that we're doing something about climate change.
And somewhere along the line people felt as if that compact got broken. And that happened long before this financial crisis hit. There are a lot of people all across the country who have done the right thing; they're having an incredibly difficult time. And the crisis compounded. In some ways, the crisis--the financial crisis, the recession--laid bare problems that had been building up for decades, whether it was an education system that wasn't teaching our children what they need to learn to be competitive in the 21st century; whether it was a health care system that was inefficient and left too many people exposed to potential bankruptcy if they got sick; whether it was an energy policy that made us dependent on the most unstable parts of the world and left our economy vulnerable to the spot oil market and was helping to destroy our environment in the process; whether it was a crumbling infrastructure, a system in Washington for keeping the books that involved a lot of money going out oftentimes to the best connected, folks with the lobbyists, the special interests, but also meant that those folks who were most powerful and best able to do it weren't having to pay their fair share of taxes.
It has to be a clear contrast of where we want to take the country and where the other folks want to take the country. Because right now obviously a lot of folks are hurting. But if we can give them a sense of possibility that, as hard as it is, we can still get there, to a place where every kid in this country has a decent education and is equipped for the 21st-century economy, a global economy; if we can try to move forward and say we're going to have an immigration system that makes sense so that we're not sending incredibly talented kids back instead of having them invest in creating new businesses here in America, which has been always part of the American Dream, part of our history; if we can say, down the road, we're not going to wean ourselves completely off of fossil fuels, but if we're smart and we pursue energy efficiency and we put people back to work on clean-energy projects, we can do a lot better than we're doing right now, and over time, if we're investing in technology and we have faith in science, there's no reason why we can't help lead the world to a more sustainable place.
It says that we're going to rehire teachers. And the Latino community obviously is deeply concerned about education. A lot of schools are understaffed in Latino communities where the young population, the youth population, is growing rapidly. Putting teachers back to work is not only good for employment, but it's also good for training our young people.
You're right, though, that the long-term challenge is how do we create an economy that is more competitive, more productive, and is employing more people. And to do that, we've got to improve our education system, which is why we place such a big emphasis on reform, particularly targeting those schools that are underperforming. And disproportionately Latino and African American youth are dropping out of high school at a time when it's very hard to find a job if you don't have not only a high school degree, but also some advanced training. So that's been a big emphasis.
Ultimately, though, the Mexican economy is going to depend also on changing some of the structures internally to increase productivity, to train the workforce there, so education in Mexico is going to be also very important. Part of what's happened is--in Mexico is, is that a lot of people have been displaced from the agricultural sector and they've moved to the cities. They don't have the skills, necessarily, for the higher skilled jobs that exist in urban areas. And so an education agenda in Mexico is also important, just as it is here in the United States.
I changed the remittance laws so that family members could more easily send money back to Cuba, because that would give them more power and it would create a economic space for them to prosper. Within Cuba we have changed the family travel laws so that they can travel more frequently, as well as laws that relate to educational travel.
But there is a basic, I think, recognition of people's human rights that includes their right to work, to change jobs, to get an education, to start a business. So some elements of freedom are included in how an economic system works. And right now we haven't seen any of that.
The President. I think the biggest challenge for all of us, but this is especially true in the Latino community, is improving our education system. And part of that is the effort we're making in schools. So, for example, we have a program called Race to the Top, where we've been saying we'll give extra money to States and school districts that are improving teacher training and making schools more accountable. It's resulted in over 40 States changing their laws to adopt to best practices in education.
So a lot of the work has to be done in terms of reforming how education is delivered. We need to improve the construction of schools. My jobs bill includes building and repairing schools. And there--especially in the Latino community, where there's a large youth population, you're seeing overcrowded schools, kids learning in trailers. That's not sending a good signal to people about the importance of education. So passing this jobs bill can be very important in terms of improving the school, the physical plant, but also putting teachers back in the classroom.
But finally, so much of school performance also has to do with attitudes at home with parents and in the community. And a strong message that I send to all students, but especially Latino and African American students, who tend to drop out at higher rates or fall behind faster, is the day is gone when without an education you can somehow get a job that supports you. Even if you're not going to a 4-year college, needing to get some advanced training at a community college, even if you want to work in a factory today, you now have to know computers, you have to have math skills, you have to be able to communicate effectively.
So telling our children, you have to turn off the TV, stop playing the video games, do your homework, aspiring to excellence in education, that's the issue that probably we have to work on. And there's no quick fix there. I mean, that's a 10-year, 20-year project. It's not a 6-month project. But if we can make significant changes there, then I think that the future prospects for our kids are going to be very strong.
So there is work to be done. There are workers ready to do it. There are companies lined up, ready to go. Let's tell Congress, pass this jobs bill right away. Pass this jobs bill, and we can start doing more for the education of our kids. In places like South Korea, they can't hire teachers fast enough. I had lunch with the President of South Korea; I asked him what's his biggest challenge. He says: "Man, these parents are so demanding. They want all our kids to be learning English when they're in first grade, so I'm hiring teachers--I'm importing teachers from overseas, that's how important this is to us. Because we know if we're investing in the future, our kids will win the race of the 21st century."
Would you rather keep tax rates for millionaires and billionaires, or do you want to invest in education and medical research and new technologies that can help create a whole new set of businesses out there for the future? Should we be asking seniors to pay thousands of dollars more in Medicare, or should we ask the biggest corporations to pay their fair share? That's what this debate is about. That's what's at stake right now.
This bill puts teachers back in the classroom. We know that the most important thing, in order for us to compete as a country, is going to be the quality of education. In places like South Korea, they are hiring teachers in droves. Here in the United States, we're laying them off. It makes no sense. We've got to be able to compete in a global economy. And it's unfair to our kids for us to be shortchanging them because we're not putting teachers in the classroom. It undermines our kids. It undermines our future. If we pass this bill, we will see tens of thousands of teachers back in the classroom where they belong. That's why I need your help. Push them to pass this bill.
And so for those of us who, I think, in 2008, decided that we needed to bring about change, I want everybody here to understand that 2008 was just the beginning and we now have to finish what we started in 2008. We have to finish what we started. We knew then that the challenges were immense, that we had gone through a decade in which ordinary people's wages and incomes hadn't gone up while the cost of everything from college to health care had risen. We knew then that the health care system was broken and we had millions of people without health care. We knew then that we didn't have an energy policy in this country. We knew then that too many jobs were being shipped overseas and not enough were taking root here in the United States of America. We knew then that our education system wasn't where it needed to be. We knew then that we were in a war in Iraq that we probably shouldn't have been in in the first place.
The President. If I've got your support. Now, keep in mind, the election is 13 months away. And in the meantime, the American people can't wait for action. And that's why for the last month what I've been spending most of my time on is trying to nudge, cajole, push, shove Congress to do its job and to pass a jobs bill that can start putting construction workers back to work and put teachers back in the classroom and rebuild our infrastructure--our roads, our bridges, our water mains, our sewer systems--rebuild our schools so that we've got the best education possible for us kids.
This is the fight that we're going to have right now, and I suspect this is the fight that we're going to have to have over the next year. The Republicans in Congress and the Republican candidates for President have made their agenda very clear. They have two basic economic principles: first, tax cuts for the very wealthiest and the biggest corporations, paid for by gutting investments in education and research and infrastructure and programs like Medicare. That's agenda item number one. Second is just about every regulation that's out there they want to get rid of: clean air, clean water, you name it.
That old "Hope" poster is fading. It's getting dog eared along the edges there. [Laughter] But I just want to remind all of you that we never said this was going to be easy. We never said that change was going to happen overnight. The problems that we confront didn't happen overnight; we weren't going to solve them overnight. The challenges we face in terms of rebuilding an economy that works for everybody, making sure that once again we have the best education system in the world, making sure that once again anybody out there who has a good idea can go out there and make it, making sure that we've got a balanced approach to reducing our deficit and getting our fiscal house in order, all those things we knew were going to take some time.
Now, part of the reason that I ran was because too many people felt that dream slipping away. For a decade, we saw that dream neglected. And so even though some of us were extraordinarily fortunate, those of us at the very top were doing very well, the average family saw their wages flatline, their incomes flatline, even as the cost of everything from a college education to their health care to their groceries to their gas was going up. More and more people felt like they were working harder just to stay in the same place or not to fall behind.
So this is the fight that we're having right now. And this is frankly what the next year is probably going to be about. The Republicans in Congress and the folks running for President have made their agenda crystal clear. They have two basic economic priorities, two basic proposals: tax cuts for the wealthiest individuals and biggest corporations, paid for by gutting investments in education and research and our infrastructure, all the things that helped make America an economic superpower; weaken programs like Medicare and our basic social safety net. That's one proposal. And the second proposal is to gut just about every regulation that you can think of.
We should not be in a race to the bottom, where we take pride in having the cheapest labor and the most polluted air and the least protected consumers. That is not a competition we can win. What we can win is a future in which we have the highest skilled workers and the best technology and the best manufacturing and the best education system and the best infrastructure. That's the race to the future that I want to win, and I know that's the race to the future that you want to win.
Because a big chunk of the entrepreneurs who are in this room, you got an education somewhere, and somebody paid for it. You got a college scholarship somewhere along the line, and somebody paid for it. Somewhere along the line, you were able to use platforms and technologies that had been developed because collectively we decided we were going to invest in basic research. There were rules of the road that governed our economic system that allowed you to prosper.
Dwight Eisenhower understood it when he built the Interstate Highway System and invested in all the math and science education that ended up helping us send a man to the Moon. My grandfather would not have gone to college had it not been for the GI bill. And there were Republicans in Congress who supported that along with FDR to make that happen. And as a consequence, not only did millions of Americans end up entering the middle class, but we went on the largest economic boom that we'd ever seen in history.
But we can't just cut our way out of prosperity. If we want to win the future, then we've got to invest in education so that every single child has an opportunity not just to graduate from high school, but to get some secondary education and get the skills and the training they need to succeed. If we want businesses to come here, we've got to invest in new roads and bridges and airports and wireless infrastructure and a smart grid. We're not going to be able to succeed otherwise.
We've got more work to do. We've got more work to do to reform our education system. We've got more work to do to bring our deficit down in a balanced way. And I can only do it with you. You are the ones who produce change.
And that's why we have come together around a plan that combines hundreds of billions in tax cuts for the middle class with direct investment in areas like health care, energy, education, and infrastructure, investments that will save jobs, create new jobs and new businesses, and help our economy grow again, now and in the future.
Both Democrats and Republicans are going to have to think differently in order to come together and solve that problem. I think there are areas like education where some in my party have been too resistant to reform, and have argued only money makes a difference. And there have been others on the Republican side or the conservative side who said no matter how much money you spend, nothing makes a difference, so let's just blow up the public school systems.
Now is the time to act boldly and wisely to not only revive this economy, but to build a new foundation for lasting prosperity. Now is the time to jump-start job creation, restart lending, and invest in areas like energy, health care, and education that will grow our economy, even as we make hard choices to bring our deficit down. That is what my economic agenda is designed to do, and that is what I'd like to talk to you about tonight. It's an agenda that begins with jobs.
You see, the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy. The ability to get a loan is how you finance the purchase of everything from a home to a car to a college education, how stores stock their shelves, farms buy equipment, and businesses make payroll.
We are a nation that has seen promise amid peril and claimed opportunity from ordeal. Now we must be that nation again, and that is why, even as it cuts back on programs we don't need, the budget I submit will invest in the three areas that are absolutely critical to our economic future: energy, health care, and education.
The third challenge we must address is the urgent need to expand the promise of education in America. In a global economy where the most valuable skill you can sell is your knowledge, a good education is no longer just a pathway to opportunity, it is a prerequisite. Right now, three-quarters of the fastest growing occupations require more than a high school diploma. And yet, just over half of our citizens have that level of education. We have one of the highest high school dropout rates of any industrialized nation, and half of the students who begin college never finish.
This is a prescription for economic decline, because we know the countries that out-teach us today will outcompete us tomorrow. That is why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education, from the day they are born to the day they begin a career. That is a promise we have to make to the children of America.
Already, we've made historic investment in education through the economic recovery plan. We've dramatically expanded early childhood education and will continue to improve its quality, because we know that the most formative learning comes in those first years of life. We've made college affordable for nearly 7 million more students--7 million. And we have provided the resources necessary to prevent painful cuts and teacher layoffs that would set back our children's progress.
It is our responsibility as lawmakers and as educators to make this system work. But it is the responsibility of every citizen to participate in it. So tonight I ask every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training. This can be community college or a 4-year school, vocational training or an apprenticeship. But whatever the training may be, every American will need to get more than a high school diploma.
Now, I know that the price of tuition is higher than ever, which is why if you are willing to volunteer in your neighborhood or give back to your community or serve your country, we will make sure that you can afford a higher education. And to encourage a renewed spirit of national service for this and future generations, I ask Congress to send me the bipartisan legislation that bears the name of Senator Orrin Hatch, as well as an American who has never stopped asking what he can do for his country, Senator Edward Kennedy.
These education policies will open the doors of opportunity for our children, but it is up to us to ensure they walk through them. In the end, there is no program or policy that can substitute for a parent, for a mother or father who will attend those parent-teacher conferences or help with homework or turn off the TV, put away the video games, read to their child. I speak to you not just as a President, but as a father, when I say that responsibility for our children's education must begin at home. That is not a Democratic issue or a Republican issue; that's an American issue.
In this budget, we will end education programs that don't work and end direct payments to large agribusiness that don't need them. We'll eliminate the no-bid contracts that have wasted billions in Iraq and reform our defense budget so that we're not paying for cold war-era weapons systems we don't use. We will root out the waste and fraud and abuse in our Medicare program that doesn't make our seniors any healthier. We will restore a sense of fairness and balance to our Tax Code by finally ending the tax breaks for corporations that ship our jobs overseas.
We've got to put our growth model on a different footing, and that means that we've got to deal with our health care system and reduce costs for families, businesses, and governments. It means that we have to think through our energy policy so that we're not so badly dependent on foreign oil. It means we've got to improve our education system so that our young people are equipped with the skills and knowledge that they're going to need to get jobs in the future.
And on education, how do we build on the reforms that we talked about during the campaign and that are funded, at least temporarily, through the stimulus package. And I gave a major speech on education priorities yesterday.
And so part of what I think every State should be doing right now is figuring out, A, how do we invest in our people so that we're attracting world-class businesses who are looking for world-class employees? I think getting K-12 education right, not short-changing higher education, I think those things are absolutely critical; thinking about where can--where do strategic infrastructure investments make sense. You know, if you think about the Midwest, one of the problems is, is that--this is my stenographer. She just wants to make sure that I'm not tripping over myself.
My goal here is to create laboratories of innovation so that in the public school system, we are on a race to the top as opposed to stuck in the old ways of doing things. And we've got to; we've got to do that. In your home town of Cleveland, I don't know off the top of my head what the dropout rate is, but I've got to assume that it's hovering around 50 percent. If you look at the number of children going through the Cleveland public schools who are actually prepared to go to college, it's probably 1 out of 7 or 8 or 10. And that's just not acceptable. It's not acceptable for them; it's not acceptable in terms of America's economic future. And so we've got to experiment with ways to provide a better educational experience for our kids, and some charters are doing outstanding jobs. So the bottom line is to try to create innovation within the public school system that can potentially be scaled up, but also to make sure that we are maintaining very high standards for any charter school that's created.
Here's what we do, though, we say that on health care, energy, and education, it's time for us to make investments that had been put off for decades and had made us less competitive. And every dime of increased spending that we include in those areas we offset either with additional revenues or with cuts, and we cut a lot of stuff.
And on education, if we're pricing people out of the college market, if nobody wants to teach because teachers don't get paid much, if we're not investing in early childhood education, if we're not investing in science and technology, then we're going to fall behind.
The other message, though, is that there are no shortcuts to long-term economic growth, and we can't just keep on doing the same things that we were doing before and somehow expect that all our problems are going to be solved. We've got to tackle some of these things like health care, energy, and education that have been put off for too long.
Our troops are faced with complex missions. Increasingly, they're called upon to defeat nimble enemies while keeping local populations on their side. And that's why my administration is committed to growing the size of our ground forces, and to investing in the skills that can help our troops succeed in the unconventional mission that they now face. We must understand different languages and different cultures; we must study determined adversaries and developing tactics. That's the education that takes place within the walls of this university, and that is the work that must be done to keep our Nation safe.
Your story is your own and the education that you're receiving will help you advance it. But you're here because you've also accepted the responsibility of having your story as part of the larger American story. Your story is serving your fellow citizens in the wider world. And my message to you today is simple: Your individual service makes all of the difference. You will make the decisions, large and small, that will help shape our future.
But the truth is that these problems in the financial market, as acute and urgent as they are, are only part of what threatens our economy. And we must not use the need to confront them as an excuse to keep ignoring the long-term threats to our prosperity: the cost of our health care and our oil addiction, our education deficit and our fiscal deficit.
That's what we've done in the past, and that's why I've chosen to address education, health care, energy, and this budget, because we can't wait to make the investments today that will lead to tomorrow's prosperity. Now, as members of the Business Roundtable, you know how important this is when it comes to each one of these challenges.
On education, I know that you just heard from Arne Duncan. You've all long understood that the success of your business ultimately depends on its ability to hire workers who have the skills and knowledge to compete with other workers and other companies all over the world. You also know that America is increasingly falling behind in that competition. That's why it will be the goal of this administration to ensure that every child has access to a complete and competitive education from the day they are born to the day they begin their career.
We've already dramatically expanded early childhood education, and we will continue to improve the quality of these programs. For as this organization knows, children who receive a quality early childhood education are more likely to attend college, more likely to hold a job, and more likely to earn more in that job.
This budget also creates new rewards tied to teacher performance and pathways for advancement and rewards for success for those teachers. And we're going to invest in innovative programs that are already helping schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. We've urged States to lift the cap on the number of charter schools they build. And I've asked every American to commit to at least 1 year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the next--by the year 2020.
And to meet that goal, we're investing $2.5 million to identify and support initiatives across the country that achieve results in helping students graduate. And we'll also make sure that a higher education is affordable for every American who wants to go.
Now, I know that some have questioned this commitment, and I want you to know that I understand the skepticism, because we've heard promises like this before. And it's true that this crisis has compelled us to add to our deficit in the short term. But I ask all of you to look at this budget. Already, we've identified $2 trillion in deficit reductions over the next decade. We've announced procurement reform that will save the Government $40 billion by greatly reducing no-bid contracts. We're going to end education programs that don't work. We will eliminate direct payments to agribusiness that don't need them. We'll root out even more waste, fraud, and abuse in our Medicare program.
The business community is committed to be a part of the solution. And those millions of jobs that you talked about, you know, largely, as you say, are coming from businesses. And therefore, we want to partner with you in terms of, one, ending this economic crisis, increasing liquidity, and getting smart regulation. And we're with you and Secretary Duncan on the education agenda, workforce development, personnel training, vocational training. We're for affordable and quality health care costs and access to that for everyone.
It is complicated, and it is international. And so our focus right now is to stabilize the financial system, get credit flowing again, to project a budget that allows in future years for us to start tackling these very big problems. But we've got to get started now if we're actually going to get there on health care, on energy, and education. And that's what we're trying to accomplish.
William D. Green. Thank you, Mr. President, and thank you also for your comments on education over the last several days. It gave us a lot of clarity, and Secretary Duncan did a terrific job of--I think it's one thing that we're very much aligned on because we realize that a competitive country needs competitive companies and in order to do that we have to have a competitive workforce.
The first one is about making sure the education system produces the skills that we need for today's and tomorrow's markets. The second thing is we need to institutionalize life-long learning. It's absolutely true, we can see that all now, and it needs to be an individual and a collective imperative for our country. And I think all of our citizens and all of our workforce needs to understand that. And the third is, for a problem that's here and now, is we need to facilitate workers in gaining new skills that have been displaced by economic dislocation and other changes in the market, which are going to be a natural occurrence over time. And we need to work forward on that. So we're just looking forward to working closely with your team to make sure we can tackle those. Thank you.
Not everything is going to be implemented now. And this, by the way, goes to a broader issue with respect to our budget. Because I think there's some people, when we issued the budget, they said, "Boy, these Obama people, they're really ambitious. They're taking on health care; they're taking on energy; they're taking on education. Don't they know that there's this bank crisis right now? We've got to do one thing at a time."
But even with consumers--I mean, we've got this interesting situation where we're actually seeing consumers do exactly what we would have liked them to do, just not all at once, and that's starting to save some, right? Paying down credit card bills, making sure that they've socked away a little bit each month for their retirement, for their kids' college education, that, ultimately, is a positive thing.
Already, we're seeing a burst of refinancing. Refinancing applications jumped 30 percent last week to more than double the rate we had last fall, saving the average homeowner hundreds of dollars a month, the equivalent of a generous tax cut. That's money in their pocket, money you can use right now to pay your bills or pay off your debts or save up for a rainy day, to save for retirement or that college education for your child.
We know and we've got three principals right here in the front row--we know that--we know and they know that countries that out-educate us today will outcompete us tomorrow. And that's why my budget invests in a complete and competitive education for every American, in early childhood education programs that work, in high standards and accountability for our schools, in finally putting the dream of a college degree or technical training within reach for anybody who wants it.
Listen, here's what I say. I say our challenges are too big to ignore. The cost of our health care is too high to ignore. Our dependence on oil is too dangerous to ignore. Our education deficit is too wide to ignore. To kick these problems down the road for another 4 years or 8 years, that would be to continue the same irresponsibility that led us to this point in the first place. And I did not run for President to pass on our problems to the next generation. I ran for President to solve these problems for the next generation and for the next President. So I--that's what you want.
So the only way that we can initiate true health care reform is if we control costs. And one of the most important ways for us to control costs is to deal with the issue of prevention, which means making sure that we have proper nutrition programs in our schools, making sure that we've got effective physical education programs for our children. It means making sure that everybody has access to a primary care doctor and that they are getting regular checkups, that we are avoiding preventable diseases like diabetes that are helping to shoot our medical costs through the roof.
The President. Well, you are exactly right, that we need everybody. And every program that we have has to be thinking on the front end, how do we make sure that it is inclusive and building into it our ability to draw on the capacities of persons with disabilities. That's true on the education front where our recovery package increases funding for children with disabilities. It is true in terms of how Hilda Solis, our Secretary of Labor, will be thinking about our training programs, to make sure that we are not excluding from training for high-tech jobs--the new jobs of the future--persons with disability. It means enforcing the ADA and fighting back on some of--court opinions that have tried to narrow, in ways that I think are inappropriate, the original intent of that legislation.
The President. Well, this is why--before we came on, the Governor and I were talking. And the fact is, is that we are massively ramping up education spending at the Federal level, on a whole variety of fronts. But historically most education funding is done at the State level, at the local level.
So we may be able to take education funding at the Federal level from 7 percent to 9 percent, for example, but the lion's share is still going to be coming locally. And that's why it's so important for everybody to be engaged in the various initiatives that are going to be coming up, to make sure that what you just articulated, the need to invest in our kids, that that is reflected in terms of State budgets.
So the reason I make that point is you can't ask local elected officials to raise teachers' salaries and cut taxes and balance the budget and increase roads. At some point you've got to make some choices. So if you want a high quality education--and California historically had the best education system in the country--then somebody has got to pay for it.
And when it comes to education--and I'm speaking to teachers here and educators--let me say this--I want to do some truth-telling here. Uh-oh. [Laughter] I love teachers. There is no profession that is more important than teaching. My sister is a teacher, but--and I am a huge supporter of the teachers' unions. They were some of my first supporters. But let me tell you, you can't just be talking more money, more money, without also talking about how are we going to reform and make the system better. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money. There's got to be a reform agenda in exchange for the money.
Now, before I get off the topic of the education, let me do a little more truth-telling. Parents, you can't complain about the schools and complain about the teachers, but when your child comes home, they're playing video games and not doing homework, and you don't have time to go to your teacher and parent--teacher-parent meeting. Our parents have to instill a sense of excellence and a thirst for knowledge.
And the truth of the matter is, even as overcrowded as schools may be, as poor the computer equipment may be, if you took a bunch of kids right now from China or India and you put them in these classrooms, from their perspective these would be unbelievable schools. I mean, they don't have better facilities, but they're out-performing us in math and science. Why is that? Well, part of it is, is that we as parents are not insisting and demanding on the kind of higher performance from our kids. So everybody has got to be more accountable in order to improve our education system.
The second thing is keep paying attention to the debates that are taking place right now, so when we have a big budget debate--I want everybody who was paying so much attention during the election to be as interested--what's going on in terms of education spending, what's going on in terms of higher health care spending, are the investments we're planning to make on energy, are they right ones? Because, again, we're going to have some tough choices to make.
The last point I want to make--I expect that over the next couple of weeks, maybe even next week, we are going to be in a position to sign a national service bill coming from the House and the Senate, and as part of this, what we're going to be doing is expanding programs like the Peace Corps and Teach For America and other mechanisms, other avenues where you can make a decision as a young person to teach for 3 years or to serve in the Peace Corps or to serve in the Foreign Service or volunteer in some fashion in your communities and help finance your education in the process. And I think there are young people all across California, all across America, who are interested in that opportunity, and I want to give that opportunity to you.
The President. Yes. She looks very nice. [Laughter] Well, let me--as I said before, Ethan, we're going to do everything we can to protect our teachers. We already passed a law in Washington that's going to give more money to the State to help keep teachers in their jobs. And one of the things that we didn't talk about earlier, we're also going to be putting more money into school construction, because there are a lot of overcrowded schools and overcrowded classrooms that don't--aren't wired for the Internet effectively. And we are going to make sure that we invest in that as well, because I want you to get a first-class education.
What I've said here in Washington is that we've got to make some tough choices; we got to make some tough budgetary choices. What we can't do, though, is sacrifice long-term growth, investments that are critical to the future. And that's why my budget focuses on health care, energy, education, the kinds of things that can build a foundation for long-term economic growth, as opposed to the fleeting prosperity that we've seen over the last several years.
The President. Well, I've emphasized repeatedly what I expect out of this budget. I expect that there's serious efforts at health care reform and that we are driving down costs for families and businesses and, ultimately, for the Federal and State governments that are going to be broke if we continue on the current path. I've said that we've got to have a serious energy policy that frees ourselves from dependence on foreign oil and makes clean energy the profitable kind of energy. We've got to invest in education, K-12 and beyond, to upgrade the skills of the American worker so we can compete in the international economy. And I've said that we've got to start driving our deficit numbers down.
The President. No, I--what I said was I haven't seen yet what provisions are in there. The bottom line is, is that I want to see health care, energy, education, and serious efforts to reduce our deficit--our budget deficit. And there are going to be a lot of details that are still being worked out, but I have confidence that we're going to be able to get a budget done that's reflective of what needs to happen in order to make sure that America grows.
Now, none of us know exactly what's going to happen 6 or 8 or 10 years from now. Here's what I do know: If we don't tackle energy, if we don't improve our education system, if we don't drive down the costs of health care, if we're not making serious investments in science and technology and our infrastructure, then we won't grow 2.6 percent, we won't grow 2.2 percent. We won't grow.
And so, what we're trying to emphasize is, let's make sure that we're making the investments that we need to grow, to meet those growth targets. At the same time, we're still reducing the deficit by a couple of trillion dollars; we are cutting out wasteful spending in areas like Medicare; we're changing procurement practices when it comes to the Pentagon budget; we are looking at social service programs and education programs that don't work and eliminate them. And we will continue to go line by line through this budget, and where we find programs that don't work we will eliminate them.
But I'm--look, I'm not going to lie to you, it is tough. As I said, that's why the critics tend to criticize, but they don't offer an alternative budget. Because even if we were not doing health care, we were not doing energy, we were not doing education, they'd still have a whole bunch of problems in those out-years, according to CBO projections. The only difference is that we will not have invested in what's necessary to make this economy grow.
Now, we've got a lot of work to do, because on our first day in office we found challenges of unprecedented size and scope. Our economy was in the midst of the most serious downturn since the Great Depression. Banks had stopped lending. The housing market was crippled. The deficit was at $1.3 trillion. And meanwhile, families continued to struggle with health care costs, too many of our kids couldn't get the education they needed, the Nation remained trapped by our dangerous dependence on foreign oil.
So that's why I introduced a budget and other measures that build on the Recovery Act to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that's built on five pillars that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century: number one, new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training; number two, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries; number three, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses; number four, new savings that will bring down our deficit; and number five, new rules for Wall Street that reward drive and innovation.
We can't rest until we have schools that prepare our children for the challenges of the 21st century. And we've already made historic investments in education and college affordability. I was talking to your superintendent about all the wonderful things that she's going to be able to do with some of the money that came out of the recovery package. We're going to continue to help our schools meet high standards and close achievement gaps. And we're going to reward teachers for performance and give them new pathways for advancement. And we will seek the goal of once again--[applause]. We are going to seek the goal of once again having the highest proportion of college graduates in the world--we're going to do it by 2020.
Just a couple more comments on education generally. A lot of schools still aren't using technology as well as they could in the classroom. And one of the things we're trying to do with the Recovery Act is to help schools get broadband, get computers, but then also train people to use it properly. I think we can do more with technology. Once kids get out of high school, making college affordable is absolutely critical. We have to redesign the college experience so that, not everybody is going to go to school for 4 years right in a row when they're 18. Some people are going to work for 2 years, then go back to school for 2 years once they figure out something they're interested in, go back to work, maybe 5 years down the road, they need to retrain.
We have to lay a new foundation for growth, a foundation that will strengthen our economy and help us compete in the 21st century. And that's exactly what this budget begins to do. It contains new investments in education that will equip our workers with the right skills and training, new investments in renewable energy that will create millions of jobs and new industries, new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses, and new savings that will bring down our deficit.
The President. All right. Okay. [Laughter] Surprised--I am surprised compared to where I started, when we first announced for this race, by the number of critical issues that appear to be coming to a head all at the same time. You know, when I first started this race, Iraq was a central issue, but the economy appeared on the surface to still be relatively strong. There were underlying problems that I was seeing with health care for families and our education system and college affordability and so forth, but, obviously, I didn't anticipate the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.
This metaphor has been used before, but the ship of state is an ocean liner, it's not a speed boat. And so the way we are constantly thinking about this issue of how to bring about the changes that the American people need is to say, if we can move this big battleship a few degrees in a different direction, we may not see all the consequences of that change a week from now or 3 months from now, but 10 years from now or 20 years from now, our kids will be able to look back and say that was when we started getting serious about clean energy; that's when health care started to become more efficient and affordable; that's when we became serious about raising our standards in education.
And finally, we will begin a national campaign to promote cybersecurity awareness and digital literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms and to build a digital workforce for the 21st century. And that's why we're making a new commitment to education in math and science and historic investments in science and research and development. Because it's not enough for our children and students to master today's technologies--social networking and e-mailing and texting and blogging--we need them to pioneer the technologies that will allow us to work effectively through these new media and allow us to prosper in the future. So these are the things we will do.
This is a very, very difficult process. And what I've got to do is to make sure that we're focused both on the short term, how can we provide families immediate relief and jump-start the economy as quickly as possible. And I've got to keep my eye on the long term, and the long term is making sure that by reforming our health care system, by passing serious energy legislation that makes us a clean energy economy, by revamping our education system, by finally getting the financial regulatory reforms in place that are necessary for the 21st century--by doing all those things, we've got a foundation for long-term economic growth, and we don't end up having to juice up the economy artificially through the kinds of bubble strategies that helped to get us in the situation that we're in today. Okay?
Point number two: I think that when my father left Kenya and traveled to the United States back in the early sixties, the GDP of Kenya and South Korea weren't equivalent; Kenya's was actually higher. What's happened over that 50-year period? What you've seen is Korea combine foreign investment, integration with the global economy, with a strategic sense of certain industries that they can promote for export; great emphasis on education for a skilled workforce; insisting that foreign investment is accompanied by technology transfer so that homegrown industries can be built and nurtured.
But I suspect that the GDP numbers will still show that the economy contracted in the second quarter, that job loss is still a huge problem. And you don't have to read GDP numbers to see that, all you got to do is talk to the American people who are still losing jobs, losing homes, and worried about their ability to keep their health care and finance their child's college educations. So we're not going to rest until we have seen not just a technical improvement in GDP but until the American people's job prospects, their incomes have rebounded, and that's going to take some time.
We are all Americans; we all want to do best for our country. We've got different ideas, but for the most part, we have the same aims, which is to make sure that people who work hard in this country and who act responsibly are able to get good jobs, good wages, raise their families, make sure those kids have a good education; that they are protected from misfortune or accident by having health care and retirement security in place; want to keep people safe, and that's why our national security team is so important.
And in that process, there are going to be some critical decisions that we're going to have to make. Are we willing to invest in the education of our young people so that we can develop the science and engineering and technology and mathematical skills that keep us at the cutting edge? We're not going to get that for free. It's not just going to be a matter of money; it's also going to be a matter of reform. But we've got to have a sense of urgency about how we pick up the pace in our schools. We're going to have to have an entirely new approach to energy, not just because of climate change and the environment, not just because of our addiction to foreign oil that ends up having us send billions of dollars overseas, but also because it is putting us at a huge competitive disadvantage.
But the Recovery Act wasn't just about tax cuts; it wasn't just about providing emergency relief for middle class families and working families who bore the brunt of this recession. It was also the largest investment in education in American history. Think about that: The largest investment in education in American history, and one that is promoting reform in States all across the country. It was the largest investment in clean energy in American history. It was the largest boost to medical research and basic research in American history. And it was the single largest investment in our Nation's infrastructure since Eisenhower built the Interstate Highway System in the 1950s, an investment that's putting people to work all across this country rebuilding not just our roads and our bridges and crumbling schools, but also creating a whole new infrastructure, a smart grid to help clean energy travel from where it's produced to where it's needed, broadband lines extending into communities that don't have it.
So you understood that now is the time to build a clean energy economy that will free our Nation from the grip of foreign oil and generate new green jobs in the process, jobs that pay well and can't be outsourced. You understood that now is the time to transform our education system so that every child is prepared to compete in this new global economy, that now was the time to make sure that we put new rules of the road in our financial sector to prevent the kinds of abuse and excess on Wall Street that led us to this crisis. You understood that. And you also understood that the insurance companies and the banks and the oil companies might not be crazy about some of these changes, that they were doing just fine under the status quo. So nobody thought this was going to be easy. We talked about this during the campaign.
In the end, the people I meet across this country, they aren't looking for a lot. They're not looking for government to solve all their problems. They just want a chance to succeed. They're modest hopes: They want a job; they want to be able to get an education. If they've got a good idea, they want to be able to get some financing to start a business. They want to retire with some dignity and respect. They want to be able to send their kids to college. They're asking for the opportunity to make the most of their own lives. That's it. It's the chance every American deserves. That's the American Dream. That's the promise I'm working to fulfill every day.
But the U.S.-Japan alliance is not just focused on security—for example, disaster prevention or health, education—we had many levels—and also environmental issues as well. We need to cooperate in all these areas so as to cooperate in the Asia Pacific and others so that we can further deepen our bilateral alliance. I believe that we have reached an agreement on these points.
My own life is a part of that story. I am an American President who was born in Hawaii and lived in Indonesia as a boy. My sister Maya was born in Jakarta and later married a Chinese Canadian. My mother spent nearly a decade working in the villages of Southeast Asia, helping women buy a sewing machine or an education that might give them a foothold in the world economy. So the Pacific Rim has helped shape my view of the world.
Now, part of that vision is working together to ensure that all nations, including Iran and South—North Korea, live up to their international obligations. We agreed to expand the educational exchanges that will fuel our knowledge-based economies. We're dramatically expanding the Fulbright-Nehru program that brings so many of our students and scholars together, especially in science and technology. And we are increasing ties and exchanges between our universities and community colleges as part of a new Obama-Singh or Singh-Obama—[laughter]—21st Century Knowledge Initiative. We think it's appropriately named.
We admire the leadership that President Obama has provided to stimulate and guide the G-20 process that is now fully in place. We have decided to give a fresh impetus to collaborations in the fields of education, agriculture, and health. We will deepen our ongoing cooperation in frontier areas of science and technology, nuclear power, and space. This will open new opportunities for our universities and laboratories and create human capital to meet the global needs of the future.
To advance that progress, we've sought new beginnings with Muslim communities around the world, one in which we engage on the basis of mutual interest and mutual respect and work together to fulfill the aspirations that all people share: to get an education, to work with dignity, to live in peace and security. That's what America believes in. That's the vision that is far more powerful than the hatred of these violent extremists.
We made historic investments--I know Eric Schmidt's here today, an extraordinary leader in our corporate community and in our technology communities--he knows what we've done in science and technology and a clean energy economy: historic investments, the largest that have ever been made. We made historic investments in education so that we're fully prepared to win the race for the 21st century.
We've got an education system that's starting to lag behind. And we've got a financial regulatory system that is completely inadequate to control the excessive risks and irresponsible behavior of financial players all around the world. At some point, we've got to take those on.
The President: That -- that is part of the advice I think that was given last year to me. Was, look, Washington is too polarized, it's too hard, the special interests are too powerful. You can't get a health care bill through because the insurance companies will spend millions of dollars of advertising against it; you can't do energy because big oil is going to be opposed; you can't try to solve the education system because whether it's the teachers' unions or this group or that group, they're going to be disenchanted and you're just going to make your own base angry. I mean, on each of these issues, the conventional political wisdom is don't take it on. Because when you take it on, it gets ugly, people get mad, there's a lot of distortions in the system, and your poll numbers will go down.
That also means, by the way, that we can spread out what we do so it's not so cram packed. It doesn't mean I back off the agenda of health care, or energy, or education, or financial regulatory reform, or dealing with our deficits. But it does mean that it doesn't have to be all on top of the other piled on. And we've got a lot more time to explain to people why we're doing what we're doing. We have a lot more time to answer critics who argue that we're not doing the right thing.
Now, because of the steps we took, there are about 2 million Americans working right now who would otherwise be unemployed. Two hundred thousand work in construction and clean energy. Three hundred thousand are teachers and other education workers. Tens of thousands are cops, firefighters, correctional officers, first-responders. And we're on track to add another 1 1/2 million jobs to this total by the end of the year.
Fourth, we need to invest in the skills and education of our people. Now, this year, we've broken through the stalemate between left and right by launching a national competition to improve our schools. And the idea here is simple: Instead of rewarding failure, we only reward success. Instead of funding the status quo, we only invest in reform, reform that raises student achievement, inspires students to excel in math and science, and turns around failing schools that steal the future of too many young Americans, from rural communities to the inner city. In the 21st century, the best antipoverty program around is a world-class education. And in this country, the success of our children cannot depend more on where they live than on their potential. When we renew the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we will work with Congress to expand these reforms to all 50 States.
That's the leadership we are providing: engagement that advances the common security and prosperity of all people. We're working through the G-20 to sustain a lasting global recovery. We're working with Muslim communities around the world to promote science and education and innovation. We have gone from a bystander to a leader in the fight against climate change. We're helping developing countries to feed themselves and continuing the fight against HIV/AIDS. And we are launching a new initiative that will give us the capacity to respond faster and more effectively to bioterrorism or an infectious disease, a plan that will counter threats at home and strengthen public health abroad.
That's why I've proposed a more than 6-percent increase in funding for the Education Department. And this funding is tied to reforms that raise student achievement, inspire students to excel in math and science, and turn around failing schools which consign too many young people to a lesser future, because in the 21st century, there is no better antipoverty program than a world-class education.
Like any business, we're also looking for ways to get more bang for our buck by promoting innovation and cutting redtape. For example, we consolidate 38 separate education programs into 11. And last fall, we launched the SAVE Awards to solicit ideas from Federal employees about how to make Government more efficient and more effective. And I'm proud to say that a number of these ideas, like allowing Social Security appointments to be made online, made it into our budget.
Mr. Grove. Well, to get good jobs, I think many Americans realize they need a higher education, but college tuition costs are so high. Here is a video question from Saginaw, Michigan.
And the last point I would make: Colleges and universities also, though, have to figure out how can they cut their costs, because even if we're putting more and more loans in--more and more money for loans, if the inflation in higher education keeps on skyrocketing, over time it's still going to gobble up all that extra money, and we'll be right back where we started. So we've got to show more restraint at the college and university level in terms of ever-escalating costs.
Mr. Grove. Well, let's back up a bit just from the specifics of education policy and ask a more fundamental question, which comes from Sean in Ohio.
The President. Well, I think obviously there's a huge economic component to being well educated. We know that if you've got a college education, you are going to make multiples of what you would make as a high school graduate, much less a high school dropout, over the course of a lifetime. But it's absolutely true that a high-quality education is not just a matter of being a good worker; it's also a matter of being a good citizen. It's also a matter of being able to think critically, evaluate the world around you, make sure that you can process all the information that's coming at us in a way that helps you make decisions about your own life, but also helps you participate in the life of the country.
Steve Grove: Well, you know, to get good jobs, I think many Americans realize they need a higher education.
And the last point I would make: Colleges and universities also, though, have to figure out how can they cut their costs. Because even if we're putting more and more loans in -- more and more money for loans, if the inflation in higher education keeps on skyrocketing, over time it's still going to gobble up all that extra money, and we'll be right back where we started. So we've got to show more restraint at the college and university level in terms of ever- escalating costs.
Steve Grove: Well, let's back up a bit just from the specifics of education policy, and ask a more fundamental question, which comes from Sean (sp) in Ohio.
Q: [From video.] Mr. President, what do you want public education to help students become? Should they be good workers, innovative thinkers, something else? As a math teacher, I want to know what you think it means to be an educated person.
The President: Well, I think obviously there's a huge economic component to being well educated. We know that if you've got a college education, you're going to make multiples of what you would make as a high school graduate, much less a high school dropout, over the course of lifetime.
But its absolutely true that a high-quality education is not just a matter of being a good worker, it's also a matter of being a good citizen, it's also a matter of being able to think critically, evaluate the world around you, make sure that you can process all the information that's coming at us in a way that helps you make decisions about your own life, but also helps you participate in the life of the country.
Now, for example, we all agree that education is the key to a 21st-century economy. We all agree that the best antipoverty program around is a world-class education. So why don't we work together to transform our schools so that every child in America can compete with their counterparts around the world, from Beijing to Bangalore. Let's work together to upgrade our community colleges, which are the gateway to a career for so many children from so many working families. And I know we've got a lot of young people who are about to head off to college. In an era when a high school diploma is no longer a guarantee of a good job, let's make college affordable for every qualified student. As I said at the State of the Union, no graduate should have to pay more than 10 percent of his or her income on student loans each year. We can see to it that they don't. We can see to it that they don't. We've got legislation pending right now that could make this happen.
Now, that's why I continue to insist on making investments for job growth this year, why I continue to insist that we put more money into education. That's why I say we put more money into science and technology for innovation. That's why I continue to believe that we've got to invest in our infrastructure so that we are building the kind of America that can compete in the 21st century. Those are smart investments. That's like buying the new boiler; if it's busted, you got to get a new boiler. If the roof's leaking, you got to fix the roof. There's some things you've got to do. But you can put off buying the new curtains, even if it'd be nice to have. [Laughter] You know, that--remodeling the bathroom, I mean, everything's working. [Laughter] You don't need it right now. I mean, what we've been having are folks who want to buy the curtains but don't want to fix the boiler. And our priorities have to change.
But I want good ideas. It is not in my interest to bloat Government with wasteful programs, because every time I spend money on a program that doesn't work, that's money that I'm not spending on early childhood education that would make a difference in a child's life, or on college scholarships to send kids to school. We've got to use our money more wisely. But that can only be done if both parties are responding to the interests of the American people and not their short-term politics.
Having said--but I think it is a legitimate criticism to say, if you say that all of it's going to be on C-SPAN, all of it's going to be on C-SPAN. Which is why, at this point, it's important for me to say that when the Republicans put forward their proposals for what they want to do on health care and we put forward what we want to do on health care, I very much want that on C-SPAN, and I want everybody here to watch. I want everybody here to watch. Because I think it will be a good educational process for people to weigh the arguments about the relative merits of the bill instead of listening to millions of dollars' worth of insurance industry ads that have been put out there or whatever pundit on the left or the right is saying about these different issues.
And the second is, what are you going to do to help my students, who want to be teachers, who want to make a difference in this world, be able to afford a college education and not be saddled with so much debt that they're working--as many teachers in Nashua are--two jobs to make ends meet to pay their student loans?
So what does that mean? On the education front, our elementary schools, our secondary schools have been slipping. We used to have the best; now we have pockets of the best, and then we have mediocrity, and then we have some schools that are just terrible. We've got to make sure every child is getting a good, solid education. And what that means is, it means we continue to invest in early childhood education, which my budget does. It means--so that our kids are prepared when they start school. It means that we help schools with just their basic budgets. And as I said, the Recovery Act prevented a lot of layoffs and really patched holes in a lot of school budgets. It's not sexy, it doesn't get a lot of credit, but it made a huge difference.
We've got to make sure, though, also, that the single most important factor in a elementary and secondary school education is fulfilled, and that is, we've got excellent teachers in the classroom who are getting paid a good salary and are getting the support that they need.
This year is when reauthorization for what's called No Child Behind would be coming up as part of the broader education legislation that's up for reauthorization. And what we're saying there is, on the one hand, we don't want teachers just teaching to the test; on the other hand, we also want to keep high standards for our kids. And I think the best way to do that is to combine high standards, measurable outcomes, but have an assessment system that you work with teachers on so that it's not just a matter of who's filling out a bubble, and you're also taking into account where do kids start, because not every kid's going to start at the same place. So you want to see where do they end up at the end of the year.
But that's not all we must do. Even as we make critical investments to create jobs today and lay a foundation for growth tomorrow--by cutting taxes for small businesses or investing in education or promoting clean energy and modernizing our roads and railways--we have to continue to go through the budget line by line, looking for ways to save. We have to cut where we can to afford what we need.
And that's precisely what we've begun to do. We're catalyzing a new clean energy industry that has the potential to employ millions of workers in good jobs. We're investing in the skills and education of our workers and reforming our education system with a goal to once again lead the world in the proportion of college graduates by the end of this decade. We're building a better health care system that works for our people, our businesses, and our Government alike. We're establishing clear, commonsense rules of the road for Wall Street that encourage innovation and creativity instead of recklessness and irresponsibility, rules that prevent firms from taking risks that threaten to bring down the entire economy. And we are rebuilding an economy where we generate more American jobs in more American industries by producing and exporting more goods and services to other nations.
They're investing in the skills and education of their people. They're investing in the high-demand industries of the future. They've benefited from American consumers. They've made themselves into export-based economies and positioned themselves for the jobs of the future. They're pursuing trade agreements with growing markets, and those agreements would give their companies access to those markets and put our workers and businesses at a disadvantage.
And so we're now in a situation in which the economy is growing, moving, and we're reforming areas like education, we're taking steps on energy. We're doing a whole bunch of things out there that are going to create the foundation for long-term economic growth.
By the way, that's why we took on the special interests. We finally reformed the student loan system so it works for students and not bankers--saved us tens of billions of dollars in wasteful spending, and we're reinvesting that money where it should have gone in the first place, and that's to your education. We're making college more affordable, and we're upgrading America's most underappreciated asset, and that's community colleges just like this one. And we're proud to do it.
Now, there are going to be times where--there are times where I've got some differences with the unions on some issues. But that's--those are arguments among friends. I do think, for example, that it's important for us to reform our education system. And my sister's a teacher. I love teachers unions; I've been supportive of them ever since I got into politics. But I do want to partner with teachers to make sure that we are improving constantly how our kids perform. And we've got to have accountability in terms of how we are making progress in school districts all across the country.
Because I want young people in America not--at this point, we can't just graduate from high school; that's not enough. We've got to go on to community colleges or go on to a 4-year education because those are the jobs that are going to exist in the 21st century. I don't want our young people having to compete simply on the basis of their willingness to work in a factory, because it's going to be very hard for them to compete over the long term in other countries where the wages may be a lot lower unless they've got higher skills and they're bringing something different to the marketplace than some of these other workers.
The President. But I'll answer your question. You're absolutely right that we can do a great job financing community colleges and student loans and college educations, but if we haven't dealt with K through 12, we're going to have problems. And the truth is, we're slipping behind. We used to have by far the best education system in the world, by a huge margin. And we don't now. I mean, we've got some of the--we have--we still have the best universities in the world, the best college system in the world, and we have some of the best schools in the world. But our overall education system is kind of in the middle of the pack in terms of advanced countries, especially in science and math, which is a huge problem because science and math is the future. That's what's going to allow you to innovate.
So I've got this terrific Secretary of Education named Arne Duncan, and one of the things that Arne and I have been trying to do is to figure out how do we jump-start more educational excellence.
A couple of ways we've done it. First of all, the Recovery Act was also the largest investment in education by the Federal Government in history, above and beyond whatever annual funding folks get. And it helped to pay for new classrooms and new laboratories and teacher training programs and a whole host of things.
Last thing I'm going to say, and this is actually important not only about education, but about how we're going to succeed as a nation in this new century. We can have the best teachers in the world, we can fund the best programs in the world, we can give all the scholarships in the world, but if parents aren't parenting their kids and emphasizing the importance of learning and education, then it's not going to make any difference. That's the key.
So I want everybody here--as parents, as community members, as church members--to know that if we're supporting our kids and we are instilling the values of responsibility and hard work and excellence and second place isn't good enough, that's how America got built, that's how we're going to build up our education system, that's how we're going to improve our economy. Government can only do so much. We're going to be there to partner with you, but you're going to have to make it happen.
More broadly, spurring job creation and economic expansion continues to be our number-one domestic priority. That's why, as I've said since the very beginning of my administration, we can't just rebuild the economy to where it was, we're going to have to rebuild it stronger than before. We've got to rebuild it on a new foundation of lasting growth. We have to tackle structural problems--from education to energy, from our financial system to our health care system, from our trade imbalance to our fiscal imbalance--that didn't just lead to 2 years of recession, but a decade of economic insecurity for middle class families.
And that's why as part of this new foundation that we seek to build, we're investing in education, because our economic success depends on making sure people have the skills to match their talents. So we launched a national competition last year to improve our schools based on a simple idea: Instead of funding the status quo, we'll only invest in reform. We've recently announced the first winners in what we're calling this Race to the Top. And across America, it's making a difference, as States are implementing reforms to raise student achievement, to improve education in math and science, and to turn around failing schools that steal the future of too many young Americans.
We are seeing rising enrollment in both 2- and 4-year schools across America. We want to make sure that those folks who are enrolling are getting the best education possible so they can serve effectively as part of your workforce.
