In the decade before Obamacare, employer-based premiums grew by an average of 8 percent a year. That meant you were paying that much more every year for health insurance. Last year, they grew by 4 percent, half as fast as they were growing. That doesn't mean you're happy about the 4 percent, but it wasn't 8. [Laughter] Today, the average family's health insurance premium is $2,600 less than it would have been if premiums had kept on going up at the pace before Obamacare. And by the way, just for folks here in Indiana, last year, most Hoosiers who shopped around for Obamacare on healthcare.gov found plans that cost 75 bucks a month or less. For the millions of Americans who buy on healthcare.gov—they get tax credits to help them pay for it—the average price increase this year has been four bucks a month. It hasn't been a double-digit percentage hike. Four bucks a month.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I, you know, don't think there's something wrong with the vetting process. I think that what happened, certainly, let's just take Tom as an example. I made a judgment that he was the best person possible for the job. I was very eager to make sure that we can deliver on a commitment that I have to deliver healthcare for the American people. I think I messed up. I screwed up in not recognizing the perception that even though this is an honest mistake, I believe, on Tom's part, that, you know, ordinary people are out there paying taxes every day and whether it's an intentional mistake or not, it was sending the wrong signal. So again, this was something that was my fault. I continue to consider Tom Daschle an outstanding public servant, uh, and what we're going to do now is make sure we get somebody confirmed and start moving forward.
Wouldn't we be better off if every American could afford quality healthcare and the peace of mind that comes with it? That's why we passed health care reform. Wouldn't we be better off if we did what's necessary to protect more of our children from the horrors of gun violence?
Sopel: Except that you've kind of got this deal, you've got Cuba, diplomatic relations, healthcare reform embedded, major trade deal with Asia. It's not a question of journalist--

If Democrats get frustrated, they say, "Well, why didn't we have a public option in our healthcare system? Or have a single payer system?"

Well, it turns out that 85 percent of people get healthcare through their jobs. They're pretty satisfied with it. They don't want big change on them. That's why it didn't happen.

When I came into office, 44 million people were uninsured. Today, we've covered more than 20 million of them. For the first time in our history, more than 90 percent of Americans are insured. In fact, yesterday was the biggest day ever for healthcare.gov. More than 670,000 Americans signed up to get covered, and more are signing up by the day.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, I, you know, don't think there's something wrong with the vetting process. I think that what happened, certainly, let's just take Tom as an example. I made a judgment that he was the best person possible for the job. I was very eager to make sure that we can deliver on a commitment that I have to deliver healthcare for the American people. I think I messed up. I screwed up in not recognizing the perception that even though this is an honest mistake, I believe, on Tom's part, that, you know, ordinary people are out there paying taxes every day and whether it's an intentional mistake or not, it was sending the wrong signal. So again, this was something that was my fault. I continue to consider Tom Daschle an outstanding public servant, uh, and what we're going to do now is make sure we get somebody confirmed and start moving forward.
MR. GREGORY: This is a critical moment in the healthcare debate. And you've been able to assess the landscape, you've got a bill now that's working its way through the Senate, you've spoken to Congress. As you assess the situation, I wonder whether you approach this with a minimum threshold of what you'll accept for reform, or at this point have you said, "I've laid out my plan, take it all or nothing"?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: You know, I, I think that my focus is on some core principles. I have to have a plan that is good for middle-class families, who we know last year ended up seeing a 5.5 percent increase in their premiums even though inflation was actually negative on everything else, that have seen a doubling of their premiums over the last decade, that are less secure than ever in terms of the insurance they can actually count on, and more and more of them can't get insurance because of pre-existing conditions or they change jobs or they lost jobs. So it's got to be good for them. Now, the principles that we've talked about--making sure that there's an insurance exchange that'll allow people to buy in and get health insurance and negotiate as a big pool to drive down costs, making sure that we have insurance reforms that make sure you can still get health insurance even if you've got a pre-existing condition, cap out of pocket expenses and so forth--those core things that make insurance a better deal for American consumers; making sure that it's deficit-neutral both now and in the future, making sure that it is driving down healthcare inflation so that we can actually deal with our long-term budget deficits, those are the core principles that are critical to me. And I actually think that we've agreed to about 80 percent of that, if you look at all the bills that are coming through all these committees. The key is now just to narrow those differences. And if I don't feel like it is a good deal for the American people, then I won't sign a bill.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, what--no. No, that's not true. What I, what I've said is the public option I think should be a part of this, but we shouldn't think that somehow that's the silver bullet that solves health care. What I've said, for example, on what's called an individual mandate--during the campaign I said, "Look, if health care is affordable, then I think people will buy it." So we don't have to say to folks, "you know what, you have to buy health care." And when I talk to healthcare experts on both the left and the right, what they tell me is that even after you make health care affordable, there's still going to be some folks out there who, whether out of inertia or they just don't want to spend the money, would rather take their chances. Unfortunately, what that means is then you and I and every American out there who has health insurance and they're paying their premiums responsibly every month, they've got to pick up the costs for emergency room care when one of those people gets sick. So what we've said is as long as we're making this genuinely affordable to families, then you've got an obligation to get health care just like you have an obligation to get auto insurance in every state.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, that--I mean, that's an example of a, of a hard choice, because that's not necessarily wildly popular, but it's the right thing to do. You know, I, I have said that it is very important that we take into account the concerns of doctors and nurses who, by the way, support our efforts. And I--and that's something that doesn't get noticed much. The people who are most involved in the healthcare system know that it's got to be reformed. But I've said that we've got to take into account their concerns about medical malpractice. Now, that's not popular in my party, never has been. But I've talked to enough doctors to know that even though it's not the end-all, be-all of driving down healthcare costs, it's very important to providers to make sure that their costs are going down. So I think there are going to be a whole series of Republican ideas, ideas from my opponents during the campaign that we have incorporated and adopted. And this is hard. And, and, you know, one of the things I've always said is if this had been easy, it would've been taken care of by Teddy Roosevelt.
MR. GREGORY: This healthcare debate, as you well know, can sometimes be about bigger things. And, and among your harshest critics...
George Stephanopoulos: He's probably talking about healthcare.
The President: Well, and if he's talking about healthcare, then I think what I'd say is, "Talk to all those people out there right now who have lost their healthcare during the course of this year because they've lost their jobs." Or all the small businesses have seen the premiums that they're paying going up 20-25 percent.
The reason I tackled healthcare wasn't because this was my personal hobbyhorse. The reason I tackled it was during the course of the campaign, I traveled all across this country and I kept on hearing heart-breaking stories about families who were bankrupt because they got sick. If they had health insurance, suddenly insurance companies were doing things that were just plain wrong, and were leaving folks in an extremely vulnerable position.
And I was talking to businesses who said this was unsustainable. And, by the way, when I got here and I looked at how we were going to get control of our long-term debt, I realized that there was no way for us to control our long-term debt unless we reformed how our healthcare system works.
Here's the problem, though. If we didn't take on healthcare, then when were we going to take it on? And if we don't take it on, then when are we going to say to families when -- 2 years from now; 3 years from now; 4 years from now -- their premiums have gone up 30-40%? And have eaten into their wages. And in some cases, their health care's been dropped altogether
What am I going to say to the small businesses who just decide, "We can't afford to provide healthcare to our employees?"
So we've got big challenges. Fundamental challenges. Not just around healthcare, but around the fact that we have an energy system that is archaic and involves us sending billions of dollars to other countries.
And so a lot of the decisions that are being made are starting to pan out. But we're not out of the woods yet. People are still hurting. And, you know, it is a great privilege for me to have the most interesting job in the world and one where, every once in a while, I'll get a letter from somebody -- you know, I -- I was traveling through Iowa. A woman comes up to me and says, you know what, that healthcare bill you passed, I'm a small business woman, I'm going to take advantage of that credit this year. This is going to help me and I might be able to hire somebody else because you just gave me the chance to get decent healthcare.
The point is that there are genuine cost drivers that are not caused by insurance companies. But what is also true is we've got to make sure that this new law is not being used as an excuse to simply drive up costs. So what we do is make sure that the Affordable Care Act gives us new tools to promote competition, transparency, and better deals for consumers. The CEOs here today need to know that they're going to be required to publicly justify unreasonable premium increases on your web sites as well as the law's new web site, healthcare.gov. As we set up the exchanges, we'll be watching closely, and we'll fully support States if they exercise their review authority to keep excessively expensive plans out of their insurance exchanges.
SOTELO: But Mr. President, you were able to pass a healthcare plan and you worked a lot for that. And most of my listeners, they haven't seen that, the same way that you worked for healthcare for immigration reform. The same effort.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, here's the difference, Piolín. First of all, on immigration reform, I can't get 100 percent of Democrats. I can get 90 percent of Democrats, but I can't get 100 percent. So with healthcare reform, we were just, like, a vote short, just one vote, and so if we've worked so hard, we could finally tip it over the edge. Right now on immigration reform, we're eight votes short or 10 votes short, so we have do the work behind the scenes to build the groundswell of support that can get us then over the finish line. What I don't wanna do is start this thing like we did several years ago and then it just collapses because if you start it and you don't finish it, then people say, well, this can't be done and four years from now, five years from now, we'll still be talking about immigration reform. What we're trying to do is to build a consensus in the country that says, this is the right thing to do, that we've got some bipartisan support. I've met with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus many times, I've met with immigration rights groups many times. I have not backed off of this issue. Just a few months ago, I gave a speech outlining very clearly my support for comprehensive immigration reform. My cabinet has been working very hard on trying to get it done, but ultimately, I think somebody said the other day, I am president, I am not king. I can't do these things just by myself. We have a system of government that requires the Congress to work with the Executive Branch to make it happen. I'm committed to making it happen, but I've gotta have some partners to do it.
THE PRESIDENT: Ah, but Piolín, look, the truth of the matter is -- here's the question that I think all your listeners have to ask themselves. If the vast majority of Democrats support this issue, if I as the President support this issue, if we've been willing to speak out on this issue forcefully and we have the other party, which not only is not supporting it, but actually doing things that are damaging to the Latino community, then the question I have is why are we spending time talking about us instead of spending time focusing on getting Republicans to do what is right? Because I'm not asking for 100 percent support from Republicans, I'm not asking even for 50 percent support from Republicans. I just want a little bit of support so that I can actually get this thing passed. Now, the fact of the matter is, is that we have worked this issue hard; we will continue to work this hard. I'm only in the first two years of my presidency and, by the way, I had a huge economic crisis. The issues like healthcare reform that we worked on are hugely important to the Latino community. By far, Hispanics are the most likely to work and not have health insurance. The issues of the economy hugely affect the Hispanic community. A lot of them were in construction and when the housing market collapsed, that meant a lot of people were laid off. So it's not as if the issues that we're working on are issues that aren't important to the Latino community. They're very important. Immigration reform is one of those issues we're gonna get it done, but I'm gonna continue to need some help from the other side.
THE FIRST LADY: It's the norm. But unemployment is high, folks are hurting. There is nothing that I would look at in this year. I wouldn't look at not giving this country healthcare, I wouldn't I wouldn't want to take back any of the investments that we have made in education. So I think from a policy perspective, he has done an outstanding job.
WALTERS: Mr. President, there are some folks who say that you squandered your political capital with the healthcare plan when you should have been focusing on jobs.
THE PRESIDENT: This notion that somehow you can only do one thing at once is simply not true. I mean, the fact is is that we stabilized the financial system...we turned an economy that was contracting to one that was growing. We have added a million jobs over the last year to the economy. And I am absolutely confident that when we fully implemented healthcare, and we started to see those costs go down and we have seen people who don't have health insurance get health insurance, and we have seen families who have health insurance more secure and they are not being jerked around by arbitrary rules from their insurance companies, that that's gonna be a lasting legacy that I am extraordinarily proud of. And there is no contradiction between that and improving our economy.
As of last fall, every American who buys a new plan can access preventive care like mammograms, immunizations, and prenatal care to get and stay healthy for free. And all of this information about the new choices and new rights available to you is available in one simple place: healthcare.gov. You can even log on, plug in your ZIP Code, and compare prices for different insurance--private insurance plans. Right now you can do that.
Now, we're also gonna have to make sure that we continue to drive down health care costs in medicare and medicaid, and that's part of what healthcare reform was all about last year. There is a contrasting vision. And you know, the Republicans in the house voted last week a system that would voucherize the medicare program so that basically seniors couldn't count on medicare being there, they would get a certain amount of money and if insurance companies said "you know what, that's not enough to buy you converge," you'd be out of luck. And I think that's the wrong way to go. I think we can make changes to the healthcare system that's smarter and works better without changing medicare in a fundamental way.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, look, keep in mind a million young people around the country have healthcare that didn't have it before because they can stay on their parent's healthcare plan. Millions of families all across the country benefited from additional drug benefits as a consequence of that healthcare plan. Thirty million Americans, including a lot of people in Florida, are going to be able to get healthcare next year because of that law.
THE PRESIDENT: You know, I don't really think about that. What I can say is this. That whoever their nominee is, they represent ideas that I think are wrong for America. They believe that we should actually make the tax code more unequal. They believe that we should not provide a pathway to citizenship for young people who were brought here when they were very young children, and are basically American kids, but right now are still in a shadow. They've said that they would veto the Dream Act. Both of them. They both believe that we should repeal a healthcare law that stands to provide millions of Latinos who work every single day the opportunity to make sure that they've got health insurance. And so on a whole range of issues I think that whether it's Mr. Romney or Mr. Gingrich or Mr. Santorum or whoever else they might decide to select, they represent a fundamentally different vision of America. And it's not the bold generous forward looking optimistic America that I think built this country.
Wouldn't we be better off if every American could afford quality healthcare and the peace of mind that comes with it? That's why we passed health care reform. Wouldn't we be better off if we did what's necessary to protect more of our children from the horrors of gun violence?
But—and here's my final point—to take advantage of these marketplaces, folks are going to need to sign up. So you can find out how to sign up at healthcare.gov—healthcare.gov—or here in California, you can sign up at coveredCA.com—coveredCA.com. Because quality care is not something that should be a privilege, it should be a right. In the greatest country on Earth, we've got to make sure that every single person that needs health care can get it. And we've got to make sure that we do it in the most efficient way possible.
But the main message I want for Californians and people all across the country, starting on October 1, if you're in the individual market, you can get a better deal. If you're a small business that's providing health insurance to your employees, you can get a better deal through these exchanges. You've got to sign up: healthcare.gov, or here in California, coveredCA.com.
We recently relaunched an upgraded, easier healthcare.gov. Beginning October 1, Americans will be able to log on and comparison shop an array of private health insurance plans side by side, just like you go online and compare the best deal on cars or the best deal on computers. Because you'll finally be part of a new pool with millions of other Americans, insurers will actually want to compete for your business. And we've made—we've worked really hard to make these marketplaces user friendly. So, for example, when the prototype of an application to join the marketplace came in at 21 pages, we rejected it. We said let's do better. It's now three pages long. And by the way, that's a lot shorter than the application you have to fill out for private insurance currently.
So you can go to healthcare.gov and right now you can pre-register essentially and start figuring out is this plan right for you.
You can find out more about the law and how to sign up to buy your own coverage right now at healthcare.gov. Tell your friends and neighbors without insurance about it too. And tell your kids that there's a new, easy way to buy affordable plans specifically tailored to young people.
And the main message we have—and we're using social media, we're talking to churches, we're talking to various civic groups—and what we're saying to people is, look, just go to the web site yourself. Go to healthcare.gov, take a look at whether this is a good deal or not, make your own decision about whether this is good for you. Because what we are confident about is that when people look and see that they can get high-quality, affordable health care for less than their cell phone bill, they're going to sign up. They are going to sign up.
President Obama. Everybody, sign up. Go to healthcare.gov. Thank you very much.
Starting on Tuesday, every American can visit healthcare.gov to find out what's called the insurance marketplace for your State. Here in Maryland, I actually think it's called marylandhealthconnection.gov—marylandhealthconnection.gov. But if you go to healthcare.gov, you can look and they'll tell you where to go. They'll link to your State.
So tell your friends, tell your family. Get covered. Get on that web site. Answer the questions of folks who don't know what this is all about. Point them to healthcare.gov. Teach them how to use the web site. Make sure they sign up. Let's help our fellow Americans get covered.
If you don't have health insurance, or if you buy it on the individual market, then starting this Tuesday, October 1, you can visit healthcare.gov to find what's called the health insurance marketplace in your State.
So get covered at healthcare.gov and spread the word. These marketplaces will be open for business on Tuesday, no matter what. The Affordable Care Act is one of the most important things we've done as a country in decades to strengthen economic security for the middle class and all who strive to join the middle class. And it is going to work.
Starting tomorrow, tens of millions of Americans will be able to visit healthcare.gov to shop for affordable health care coverage. So Americans who've lived—for years in some cases—with the fear that one illness could send them into bankruptcy, Americans who've been priced out of the market just because they've been sick once, they'll finally be able to afford coverage, quality coverage, many of them for the first time in their lives.
And these Americans are here with me today because, even though the Government is closed, a big part of the Affordable Care Act is now open for business. And for them, and millions like them, this is a historic day for a good reason. It's been a long time coming, but today, Americans who have been forced to go without insurance can now visit healthcare.gov and enroll in affordable new plans that offer quality coverage. That starts today.
So if these stories of hard-working Americans sound familiar to you, well, starting today, you and your friends and your family and your coworkers can get covered too. Just visit healthcare.gov, and there you can compare insurance plans, side by side, the same way you'd shop for a plane ticket on Kayak or a TV on Amazon. You enter some basic information; you'll be presented with a list of quality, affordable plans that are available in your area, with clear descriptions of what each plan covers and what it will cost. You'll find more choices, more competition, and in many cases, lower prices. Most uninsured Americans will find that they can get covered for a hundred dollars or less.
And you don't have to take my word for it. Go on the web site, healthcare.gov, check it out for yourself. And then show it to your family and your friends and help them get covered, just like mayors and churches and community groups and companies are already fanning out to do across the country.
And there's a hotline where you can apply over the phone and get help with the application or just get questions that you have answered by real people in 150 different languages. So let me give you that number. The number is 1-800-318-2596. 1-800-318-2596. Check out healthcare.gov. Call that number. Show your family and friends how to use it. And we can get America covered, once and for all, so that the struggles that these folks have gone through and millions around the country have gone through for years finally get addressed.
Now, like every new law, every new product rollout, there are going to be some glitches in the signup process along the way that we will fix. I've been saying this from the start. For example, we found out that there have been times this morning where the site has been running more slowly than it normally will. The reason is because more than 1 million people visited healthcare.gov before 7 in the morning.
More than 6 million people visited the web site healthcare.gov the day it opened. Nearly 200,000 people picked up the phone and called the call center. In Kentucky alone—this is a State where I didn't—I didn't win Kentucky. [Laughter] So I know they weren't doing it for me. In Kentucky, nearly 11,000 people applied for new insurance plans in the first 2 days. Just in one State, Kentucky. And many Americans are finding out when they go on the web site that they'll save a lot of money or get health insurance for the first time.
Of course, you've probably heard that healthcare.gov—the new web site where people can apply for health insurance and browse and buy affordable plans in most States—hasn't worked as smoothly as it was supposed to work. And the number of people who have visited the site has been overwhelming, which has aggravated some of these underlying problems.
So the fact is, the product of the Affordable Care Act for people without health insurance is quality health insurance that's affordable. And that product is working. It's really good. And it turns out, there's a massive demand for it. So far, the national web site, healthcare.gov, has been visited nearly 20 million times. [Applause] Twenty million times. And there's great demand at the State level as well, because a lot—there are a bunch of States that are running their own marketplaces.
But while we're working out the kinks in the system, I want everybody to understand the nature of the problem. First of all, even with all the problems at healthcare.gov, the web site is still working for a lot of people, just not as quick or efficient or consistent as we want. And although many of these folks have found that they had to wait longer than they wanted, once they complete the process, they're very happy with the deal that's available to them, just like Janice is.
But you don't have to just go through the phone. You can also apply in person with the help of local navigators. These are people specially trained to help you sign up for health care, and they exist all across the country. Or you can go to community health centers and hospitals. Just visit localhelp.healthcare.gov to find out where in your area you can get help and apply for insurance in person.
Ultimately, the easiest way to buy insurance in this marketplace will be a new web site, healthcare.gov. But as you may have heard, the site isn't working the way it's supposed to yet. It's frustrating for all of us who have worked so hard to make sure everyone who needs it gets health care. And it's especially frustrating for the Americans who have been trying to get covered. The site has been visited more than 20 million times so far. Nearly 700,000 people have applied for coverage already. And that proves just how much demand there is for these new, quality, affordable health care choices. And that's why, in the coming weeks, we are going to get it working as smoothly as it's supposed to. We've got people working overtime, 24/7, to boost capacity and address these problems, every single day.
But even as we improve the web site, remember that the web site isn't the only way to apply for coverage under these new plans. We've updated healthcare.gov to offer more information about enrolling over the phone, by mail, or in person with a specially trained navigator who can help answer your questions. Just call 1-800-318-2596 or visit localhelp.healthcare.gov. And don't worry: These plans will not sell out. We're only a few weeks into a 6-month open enrollment period, and everyone who wants insurance through the Marketplace will get it.
Now, ultimately, this web site, healthcare.gov, will be the easiest way to shop for and buy these new plans, because you can see all these plans right next to each other and compare prices and see what kind of coverage it provides. But look, it's—there's no denying it, right now, the website is too slow, too many people have gotten stuck. And I am not happy about it. And neither are a lot of Americans who need health care, and they're trying to figure out how they can sign up as quickly as possible. So there's no excuse for it. And I take full responsibility for making sure it gets fixed ASAP. We are working overtime to improve it every day. Every day.
Now, there have been some tough parts, let's face it. The truth of the matter is, is that while ultimately, healthcare.gov, the web site, is going to be the easiest place to shop for and buy these new plans—and it's getting faster and more stable—it's not where it needs to be yet. I'm not happy about it, as you might imagine. [Laughter] I'm not happy about it, because I know that people need health care and this is the right place to get it.
And so I just want all of you to remember that, as challenging as this may seem sometimes, as frustrating as healthcare.gov may be sometimes, we are going to get this done. And when we do—when we do, not if—when we do, you're going to have families all across this great State of Texas who are going to have the security and the well-being of high-quality, affordable health insurance. And that's going to be good for business. It means that all the providers around here, instead of having to take in folks in the emergency room, they suddenly have customers who have insurance. That means those of you who already have health insurance, your premiums will not be subsidizing folks who don't have health insurance. People will get preventive care, which means that people are likely to be healthier.
And that's what's gotten lost a little bit over the last couple of months. And our focus, rightly, had to shift towards working 24/7 to fix the web site, healthcare.gov, for the new marketplaces where people can buy affordable insurance plans. And today, the web site is working well for the vast majority of users. More problems may pop up, as they always do when you're launching something new. And when they do, we'll fix those too. But what we also know is that after just the first month, despite all the problems in the rollout, about half a million people across the country are poised to gain health care coverage through marketplaces and Medicaid beginning on January 1, some for the very first time. We know that: half a million people. And that number is increasing every day, and it is going to keep growing and growing and growing because we know that there are 41 million people out there without health insurance. And we know there are a whole bunch of folks out there who are underinsured or don't have a good deal. And we know the demand is there, and we know that the product on these marketplaces is good and it provides choice and competition for people that allow them, in some cases for the very first time, to have the security that health insurance can provide.
So I'm going to need some help in spreading the word. I'm going to need some help in spreading the word. I need you to spread the word about the law, about its benefits, about its protections, about how folks can sign up. Tell your friends. Tell your family. Do not let the initial problems with the web site discourage you because it's working better now and it's just going to keep on working better over time. Every day, I check to make sure that it's working better. [Laughter] And we've learned not to make wild promises about how perfectly smooth it's going to be at all times, but if you really want health insurance through the marketplaces, you're going to be able to get on and find the information that you need for your families at healthcare.gov.
Matthews. You have a great audience here of college-age people and some graduate students and faculty. There's some resistance out there among young people -- I've seen it in the polls -- to enrolling in the exchanges and to get involved in taking responsibility for their healthcare.

Then there was the strong chief of staff, sort of the military command system of General Eisenhower as president. And, of course, Ronald Reagan did it superbly with a great chief of staff, a strong one, Jim Baker. What concerned -- Zeke Emanuel, who worked with you on healthcare, said the other day is there should have been a CEO assigned by you personally with unique personal responsibility to oversee the rollout of healthcare, and there wasn't. When Secretary Sebelius appeared in that hearing and she was asked by Marsha Blackburn...

And for all the challenges we've had and all the challenges that we've been working on diligently in dealing with both the ACA and the web site these past couple months, more than half a million Americans have enrolled through healthcare.gov in the first 3 weeks of December alone. In California, for example, a State operating its own marketplace, more than 15,000 Americans are enrolling every single day. And in the Federal web site, tens of thousands are enrolling every single day. Since October 1, more than 1 million Americans have selected new health insurance plans through the Federal and State marketplaces. So all told, millions of Americans, despite the problems with the web site, are now poised to be covered by quality, affordable health insurance come New Year's Day. Now, this holiday season, there are mothers and fathers and entrepreneurs and workers who have something new to celebrate: the security of knowing that when the unexpected or misfortune strikes, hardship no longer has to.
More Americans are signing up for new private health insurance plans every day. Already, 3 million people have signed up. So if you know somebody who isn't covered, who doesn't have health insurance, call them up, sit them down, help them get covered at healthcare.gov by March 31.
So the days when folks are just on their own, out of luck, those days are over. More Americans are signing up for new private health insurance plans every day. We're signing folks up for Medicaid. And if you know somebody who isn't covered, call them up, sit them down, help them get covered at healthcare.gov by March 31. We are going to get all of America covered. That's one of my commitments.
Making work pay also means access to health care that's there when you get sick. The Affordable Care Act means nobody is going to get dropped from their insurance or denied coverage because of a preexisting condition like back pain or asthma. You can't be charged more if you're a woman. Those days are over. More Americans are signing up for private health insurance every day. So if you know somebody who isn't covered—the great thing about this shop is, because of strong union leadership and GE is a great company, most of the folks who work here, they've got good health insurance. But you've got friends, family members, maybe kids who are older than 26—because if they're younger than 26, they should be able to stay on your plan, thanks to the law that we passed, but if they don't have health insurance right now— call them up, sit them down, help them get covered at healthcare.gov by March 31.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don't think -- as I said, I don't think anybody anticipated the degree of the problems that you'd had on healthcare.gov. The good news is that right away we decided how we were going to fix it. It got fixed. Within a month and a half it was up and running and now it's working the way it's supposed to and we've signed up three million people.
THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Shulman, as the head of the IRS, is constantly coming in because at the time we were trying to set up the healthcare.gov and the IRS --
THE PRESIDENT: -- the IRS is involved in making sure that works, as part of the overall healthcare team.
So if you know anybody who doesn't have health insurance right now—[laughter]—send them to healthcare.gov. The website is working. [Laughter] Sign them up. You can get health care for less than your cell phone bill for a lot of folks.
And when it comes to making sure that Americans have access to affordable health care, we're seeing the same pattern. Peter alluded to it. Right now we've already got close to 4 million Americans who have signed up for exchanges. We've got 3 million Americans who were able to stay on their parent's plan because of the law. We've got close to 7 million Americans who have access to health care for the first time because of Medicaid expansion. So we've already got well over 10 million Americans just in the first few months, despite problems with healthcare.gov in the first month and a half, who suddenly have the financial security that, in some cases, they've never known before.
So, for everybody out there that's in a mixed family, there's no sharing of the data from the healthcare plan into immigration services. You should feel confident that if somebody in your family is eligible, you should sign them up.
But, for the majority of people when you sign up on this website, you will discover that because of the tax credits and subsidies that are available, that the vast majority of people will find a good option that is affordable for them. And as I said before, a large portion of people will be able to find health insurance for $100 or less. Now there may be some circumstances where somebody is making $40,000, $50,000 a year. They've got a health insurance option that, you know, cost $300 a month for their family. And they may say, you know, with all the bills that I've got that's too tight. I guess I would say is if you looked at that person's budget and you looked at their cable bill, their telephone, their cell phone bill, other things that they're spending on, it may turn out that it's just they haven't prioritized to healthcare because right now everybody's healthy. Nobody actually wants to spend money on health insurance until they get sick. And then once they're sick, the costs of not having health insurance are a lot worse than the cost of having health insurance. I guarantee you if that gentleman who just wrote you that letter, and I don't know his particular circumstance and whether he actually has gotten all the information about the subsidies that might be available.
THE PRESIDENT: Even if you could get better health insurance on healthcare.gov. You should be able to keep it. And that's the law that we have extended. And on a program like this that has so many people involved. And millions of people who are trying to find health insurance, or get better health insurance they're always going to be some smoothing out of the process that has to take place. But keep in mind that for the majority of people even if they have health insurance on the individual market, they should go to the website because they may qualify for tax credits. They may qualify for subsidies that give them better health insurance for less money. And keep in mind that we've already seen over 4 million people sign up. And I get letters everyday from people who signed up, they say, you know, I didn't agree with you on Obamacare, and I thought it was a terrible law. But then my cousin told me I should look on the website. And I'm now saving $200 a month on my premiums for better health insurance. So the main message I have for everybody who's listening or watching is, look to see if in fact you can get a better deal.
ACEVEDO: Mr. President, the reason we're here, and we said this at the beginning is that the Latino community is key for the success of this healthcare reform. Now we have the very same deadline of March 31, we said this at the beginning. But now we have had access to information, different tools, and different platforms that did not operate the same way in English as they did in Spanish. Now taking this into account, why not consider extending the deadline that we're looking at?
BALART: Mr. President, this year if immigration is approved would you include the, but would you act unilaterally in that case so that the, now people on the path to citizenship would benefit from the healthcare reform.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, we will have to see what the law looks like. My first and foremost goal is getting comprehensive immigration reform done. And my suspicion is if we get that passed, then initially at least, the Republicans will insist that people are not eligible for various benefits, even if they have a legal status. I think that's a principle they've generally expressed. But the good news is once somebody has a legal status, first of all, they're more likely to be able to get a job that provides health insurance. So they may not need the subsidies through the Affordable Care Act. Second of all, over time I think it becomes less of a political issue. You'll recall that when I came into office the law on the Children's Health Insurance Program did not allow children who were legal permanent residents from taking advantage of the law. Well, that's something I reversed. It didn't make any sense if they're here legally then we should be able to make sure that those children have the healthcare that they need. But that's a discussion for a future date. I think the important thing for now is there are millions of people are definitely eligible who right now are not taking advantage of it.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, you know, on a complicated program like this, and this is true of every social program. There are always improvements and modifications that can be made. And what I've said to the Republicans is if they have something specific that makes sense for families, makes healthcare more affordable, drives down costs, covers more people, we're happy to look at it. But there's a reason why they've never actually put forward a serious alternative. Did you notice for the last 5 years they've been saying, this is terrible, we've got a better way of doing it. And then we keep on waiting for their plan of a better way of doing it, and they don't produce it. Well, the reason is, is because actually we have taken the best ideas, conservative ideas, liberal ideas, and we've put them together and we're now implementing them. And what I can say is that if in fact people sign up and take advantage, if they go to the website, if they make the calls, they go to the community clinic, and they get the information, I am absolutely confident that you will see millions of people benefitting from this law. It doesn't mean that at some point there won't be some additional problems or improvements that we can make. It doesn't…
Of course, but that's true for pretty much everybody in the population. If something's wrong then they're saying, why hasn't Obama done something about this. That doesn't, that's not just true of here in the United States. That's around the world. You know, you got people in Africa and Asia and Europe and China saying, why didn't Obama do something about this, this is a terrible problem. And I understand that, that's part of the job. The main message I have for the community right now is, and Latin America. The main question that I have, or the main point that I have for everybody watching right now is you don't punish me by not signing up for healthcare. You're punishing yourself or your family if in fact there's affordable healthcare there to be had and subsidies and tax credits that allow you to have the peace of mind and security and regular checkups and preventive care that would keep you healthier. That's not a matter of trusting me, that's a matter of looking for yourself and seeing if you can get services.
It means making sure that you can save and retire with dignity. It means health insurance that's there when you're sick and you need it most. And you guys are doing a great job implementing the Affordable Care Act here in Connecticut. If any of you know a young person who is uninsured, help them get covered at healthcare.gov. The website works just fine now. [Laughter] They've got until March 31 to sign up, and in some cases, it's going to cost less than your cell phone bill. So check it out, healthcare.gov.
Now, making work pay means making sure women earn equal pay for equal work. It means giving women the chance to have a baby without sacrificing jobs or a day off to care for a sick child or parent without worrying about making ends meet. It means making sure every American has access to quality, affordable health care that's there when you need it. So if there's somebody out there that you know that doesn't have health insurance, make sure they go on healthcare.gov—[laughter]—before March 31. That's a priority. And it means wages and paychecks that help to support a family.
Now, let me close by mentioning one last policy that's benefiting millions of women right now, and that is the Affordable Care Act. I know there's a lot of politics around it. I know there are a lot of TV ads around that don't always accurately reflect what's going on. But right now, despite the fact that the website was really bad for the first month—[laughter]—it's now fixed—more than 5 million Americans have signed up for plans at healthcare.gov. More than 5 million. More than 3 million young people have gained coverage because this law lets you stay on your parent's plan until you turn 26. So I'll bet there are some young people right now who have health insurance in this auditorium because of the law.
So there's an important deadline coming up, by the way. This is now the last call for 2014. If you've been thinking about buying one of the new plans on healthcare.gov—and a large proportion of people, the majority, in fact, may be able to buy health insurance for as little as a hundred bucks or less a month, less than your cable or your cell phone bill. I saw everybody had a cell phone. [Laughter] But the deadline to get covered this year is March 31, which is just 11 days away. So if you are uninsured, check out your new choices at healthcare.gov. Many of you will be able to get covered for a hundred dollars a month or less. If you're already covered, then help get a friend covered, because that's part of what America is about: taking responsibility for working to achieve our own dreams; also coming together to help our fellow citizens pursue and secure their own dreams as well.
Six months ago today, a big part of the Affordable Care Act kicked in as healthcare.gov and State insurance marketplaces went live. And millions of Americans finally had the same chance to buy quality, affordable health care—and the peace of mind that comes with it—as everybody else.
And while it remains true that you'll still have to change your coverage if you graduate from college or turn 26 years old or move or switch jobs or have a child—just like you did before the Affordable Care Act was passed—you can now go to healthcare.gov and use it year-round to enroll when circumstances in your life change. So no, the Affordable Care Act hasn't completely fixed our long-broken health care system, but this law has made our health care system a lot better. [Applause] A lot better.
Yes, we lost the first quarter of open enrollment period with the problems with healthcare.gov, and they were problems. But under Kathleen's leadership, her team at HHS turned the corner, got it fixed, got the job done, and the final score speaks for itself: There are 7½ million people across the country that have the security of health insurance, most of them for the very first time. And that's because of the woman standing next to me here today. And we are proud of her for that. That's a historic accomplishment. [Applause] That's right.
Of course, we rolled out healthcare.gov. That could have gone better. [Laughter] In 2008, my slogan was, "Yes, we can." In 2013, my slogan was, "Control-Alt-Delete." [Laughter] On the plus side, they did turn the launch of healthcare.gov into one of the year's biggest movies. [Laughter]
Third, we know how to fight this disease. We know the protocols. And we know that when they're followed, they work. So far, five Americans who got infected with Ebola in West Africa have been brought back to the United States, and all five have been treated safely, without infecting healthcare workers.
In terms of enrollment, we'll do some additional announcements about that in the days to come. Starting in the middle of this month, people can sign up again. I think there are a number of people who the first time around sat on the sidelines in part because of our screw-ups on healthcare.gov. That's one area, Ed, by the way, that's very particular. We're really making sure the website works super well before the next open enrollment period. [Laughter] We're double- and triple-checking it. And so I think a lot of people who maybe initially thought, we're not sure how this works, let's wait and see—they're going to have an opportunity now to sign up. And what's been terrific is to see how more private insurers have come into the marketplace so that there's greater competition in more markets all around the country. The premiums that have come in that are available to people and the choices that are available are better than a lot of people, I think, had predicted.
Hi, everybody. Over the past year, more than 10 million Americans have gained the financial security and peace of mind that comes with health insurance. More than 7 million people enrolled in affordable coverage by visiting healthcare.gov or going to the marketplace in their State. On average, they're paying just $82 a month for coverage. For a lot of people, that's less than a cell phone bill or a cable bill. Insurance companies can no longer deny you coverage just because you have a preexisting condition, and they now have to cover free preventive care like checkups and mammograms.
If you missed your chance to get covered last year, here's the good news. Starting November 15, today, you can go online or call 1-800-318-2596 and get covered for 2015. And we've spent the last year improving and upgrading healthcare.gov to make it faster and easier to use.
Last year, I got an e-mail from a woman named Amy Williams, in Augusta, Georgia. She and her husband are self-employed in the trucking business. For years, they paid about $1,200 a month for their health insurance. Then, they checked out healthcare.gov. They found a plan with coverage they liked, and it was way less expensive. She says that they've saved around $13,000 on their premiums this year alone.
So spread the word. Tell your friends and family members to get covered. Talk to folks in your church or your classroom. Tell them to take a few minutes to check out healthcare.gov or cuidadodesalud.gov or call 1-800-318-2596. It can make a big difference in their lives. Let them know that it's easy, it's affordable, and that they have just 3 months, starting today, November 15, to sign up. Together, we can make sure that even more of America gets covered in the year ahead.
Finally, in a very difficult budgetary environment, Chuck has never lost sight of key priorities: the readiness of our force and the quality of our life of our troops and their families. He's launched new reforms to ensure that even as our military is leaner, it remains the strongest in the world, and so our troops can continue to get the pay, the housing, the healthcare, the childcare that they and their families need, reforms that we need Congress to now support. At the same time, after the tragedies that we've seen, Chuck has helped lead the effort to improve security at our military installations and to stamp out the scourge of sexual assault from the ranks.
The President. I think that if you look at the history of race in America, it's usually not a single moment when suddenly everything gets solved. It's a process. I think that because of our policies there's more equality than when I came in, with respect to healthcare, with respect to access to college, with respect to opportunity. I think because of the work that Eric Holder has done under my direction. The criminal...

It gives you peace of mind. And, you know, I -- I want to encourage everybody who hasn't at least looked at it, to go to healthcare.gov. You know, as you know, we had some bad hiccups initially in terms of the website, but -- but now the website works really well. H. Green: It does.

So I want everybody to get on healthcare.gov, find out what options are available to you in your State and in your community. We have people around this table who are paying as little as $30 or $20 a month for premiums. Some are paying more, but again, the average is less than a hundred dollars a month. And that is something that a lot of folks out there can afford. And we've got millions of people who are still qualified who have a chance to sign up, but you've got to do it by February 15. So get on healthcare.gov, look at what your options are. Don't take my word for it. But understand that this is something that can give you the kind of security and peace of mind that is priceless.
But then her mom called, as moms sometimes do, and told Anne to get insured against the "what ifs" of life. What if you get sick? What if you get into a car accident? So Anne, dutiful daughter that she was, went to healthcare.gov, checked out her options in the marketplace. And thanks to the tax credits available to her under this law, she got covered for 85 bucks a month. Four months later, Anne was diagnosed with early-stage stomach cancer. Anne underwent surgery, endured chemo. Today, she's recovering. She looks great. She's here with us at the White House. She invited me to her wedding. I told her you don't want the President at her wedding. [Laughter]
The President. — Bush, suddenly people start breaking apart. And then the question then becomes how do you break out of that pattern and that's something I've spent a lot of time with over the last six and a half years. I've spent a lot of time just on policy and trying to get stuff right. You know, how do we make sure that we create more jobs, how do we make sure that when I first came in, how do I prevent another Great Depression. How do I make sure folks have healthcare. But increasingly I've spent my time thinking about how do I try to break out of these old patterns—

The President. — a society of opportunity. And the question then is how do the operation lines those abstract concepts into something really concrete. You know how do we get someone a job, how do we improve a school, how do we make sure that everybody gets decent healthcare. As soon as you start specifics then the world's complicated.

The President. —is never instantaneous and it's always partial and you can't get cynical or frustrated just because you didn't get all the way there immediately. So during the healthcare debate there were a lot of people who just wanted a single payer plan.

The President. Right. And as I said before, if I were designing the system from scratch, that would probably make more sense. We are the only country on earth—not the only country on earth but we are one of the few countries that has this weird amalgam of private sector and medicare and sort of a patchwork system, hugely inefficient. We spend more than any of the other advanced countries, our outcomes aren't necessarily better. But the notion that we were just going to scrap the existing healthcare system which is a sixth of our economy, it employs millions of people and—that wasn't going to happen.

The President. So the question is alright, given where we are starting now, how do we move as best we can in the right direction? Five years later, we've got millions of people who have healthcare who didn't have it before we have the lowest uninsured rate that has ever been recorded. But for a lot of people they are looking at it and saying "Well, we didn't get everything we wanted." For me, what I say to myself is, for those millions of people, many of whom write to me and say "You saved my life," that's democracy working, that's government working.

Marc Maron. And it's fascinating to me that you're even able to maintain this hope. And then again on monday when this post the supreme court's gonna make a decision about your bill—the healthcare bill. I mean that's a huge thing, this is a slightly very crazy case...

The President. And they are not going to be able to follow the intricacies of the healthcare debate so if someone is going around saying death panels—

Sopel: Except that you've kind of got this deal, you've got Cuba, diplomatic relations, healthcare reform embedded, major trade deal with Asia. It's not a question of journalist--

We believe every American deserves access to quality, affordable health care. And since I signed the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare—[laughter]—we signed it 5½ years ago—since then, 16 million Americans have gotten covered. More than 18,000 Alaskans have been able to purchase private plans through healthcare.gov. Thanks to the leadership of Governor Walker and Lieutenant Governor Mallott, another 17,000 are projected to gain access to health insurance under Medicaid next year. So we appreciate that. And that means more Alaskans can get things like mammograms and physicals. And it means fewer Alaskans will go broke just because they get sick. It will save this State an estimated $20 million in costs of care for people who can't afford to pay for it. So it's going to make a difference.
If you haven't gotten covered yet, or if you care about someone who hasn't gotten covered yet, now's your chance. It's open enrollment season for the health insurance marketplace. What that means is, with a few clicks on healthcare.gov, you'll find private insurance companies competing for your business. You can compare plans and choose the one that's right for your family. In fact, most Americans will find an option that costs less than $75 a month. Even if you already have insurance through the marketplace, check it out. Shopping around can save you a lot of money. Last year, consumers who shopped saved almost $400.
Take the story of a man named Phil Viso, who e-mailed me earlier this year. Phil's a software developer from my hometown of Chicago. Last winter, he had an idea for a new app and decided to start his own company. And that can be scary when you need to get your own insurance. But Phil logged on to healthcare.gov, answered a few questions, picked a plan, and even found out he was eligible for a tax credit that saved him money.
So join them. Give it a shot. Check out healthcare.gov, cuidadodesalud.gov, or call 1-800-318-2596 to find a plan that's right for you or someone you care about.
Years of steady implementation of the Affordable Care Act helped to drive the rate of the uninsured in America below 10 percent for the first time since records were kept on that. Health care prices have grown at their lowest level in five decades, 17 million more Americans have gained coverage, and we now know that 6 million people have signed up through healthcare.gov for coverage beginning on January 1—600,000 on Tuesday alone. New customers are up one-third over last year. And the more who sign up, the stronger the system becomes. And that's good news for every American who no longer has to worry about being just one illness or accident away from financial hardship.
Number nine: More Americans are getting health coverage. The rate of uninsured in America dropped below 10 percent for the first time ever. In all, 17.6 million people and climbing have gained coverage as the Affordable Care Act has taken effect. And don't forget, you can still sign up through January 31 at healthcare.gov.
If you haven't looked at your new coverage options, you've still got time to get covered on the health insurance marketplace for 2016. In fact, you have until January 31, next Sunday, to enroll. Just go to healthcare.gov or cuidadodesalud.gov or call 1-800-318-2596. Most folks buying a plan on the marketplace can find an option that costs less than $75 a month. Even if you already have insurance, take a few minutes to shop around. In fact, consumers who switched to a new plan for 2016 ended up saving an average of more than $500.
And so there's an example of an outdated system, bloated, risk averse, not working well. Here's what happened as a consequence of healthcare.gov breaking down, though—we had to bring in a SWAT team of all my friends from Silicon Valley and from Austin and some of the best software engineers in the world to come in and fix it, which we did in about 3, 4 months' time.

If Democrats get frustrated, they say, "Well, why didn't we have a public option in our healthcare system? Or have a single payer system?"

Well, it turns out that 85 percent of people get healthcare through their jobs. They're pretty satisfied with it. They don't want big change on them. That's why it didn't happen.

The President. Well the truth is we did overcome it in all sorts of ways. We passed historic healthcare legislation, we expanded Pell grants and transferred student loan programs from banks that were syphoning off billions of dollars, and that money is now going to students. We've been able to, you know, move forward the single largest recovery package in history that helped avert a great depression. We were able to negotiate a deal that got nuclear stockpiles out of Iran, and that will make the world safer. So we've been able to overcome a lot of resistance, but there's no doubt that we could've got a lot more had we had greater cooperation from Republicans.

If we are changing just a few laws that make it easier, for example, for workers to organize, that close corporate tax loopholes or tax loopholes used by wealthy individuals so that they're not paying their fair share — if we take that money and make sure that we're investing in the kinds of things that make an economy grow, if we ensure that we've got a healthcare system that is affordable and accessible for all people, then I'm confident that America's best days are still ahead. I do think it's important, even as people may be frustrated, to remind ourselves both of all the terrific advantages that America still has in terms of the best universities in the world and the best scientists and researchers, and some of the most innovative companies and the ease of doing business. But that's not a cause for complacency — that just tells us that when we put our shoulder behind the wheel and we're focused, that we can get things done.

In the decade before Obamacare, employer-based premiums grew by an average of 8 percent a year. That meant you were paying that much more every year for health insurance. Last year, they grew by 4 percent, half as fast as they were growing. That doesn't mean you're happy about the 4 percent, but it wasn't 8. [Laughter] Today, the average family's health insurance premium is $2,600 less than it would have been if premiums had kept on going up at the pace before Obamacare. And by the way, just for folks here in Indiana, last year, most Hoosiers who shopped around for Obamacare on healthcare.gov found plans that cost 75 bucks a month or less. For the millions of Americans who buy on healthcare.gov—they get tax credits to help them pay for it—the average price increase this year has been four bucks a month. It hasn't been a double-digit percentage hike. Four bucks a month.
Second, for people who made too much to qualify for Medicaid even after we expanded it, we set up what we call marketplaces on healthcare.gov so you could shop for a plan that fits your needs, and then we would give you tax credits to help you buy it. And most people today can find a plan for less than $75 a month at the healthcare.gov marketplace when you include the tax credits that Government is giving you. That means it's less than your cell phone bill, because I know you guys are tweeting a lot—[laughter]—and texting and selfies. [Laughter] And the good news is that most people who end up buying their coverage through the marketplaces using these tax credits are satisfied with their plans.

Again, the tax credits in the ACA will protect most consumers from the brunt of these premium increases. And with the ability to shop around on healthcare.gov, which works really well now—[laughter]—most people can find plans for prices even lower than this year's prices. But there are going to be people who are hurt by premium increases or a lack of competition and choice. And I don't want to see anybody left out without health insurance. I don't want to see any family having to choose between health insurance now or saving for retirement or saving for their kids' college education or just paying their own bills.

And the good news is, in a few days, you can do just that because open enrollment, the time when you can start signing up, begins on November 1. And you just need to go to healthcare.gov, which works really well now. [Laughter]

So the bottom line is that most people are going to be pleasantly surprised at just how affordable their options are if we can just get them to see for themselves. This is not one of those things where they're going to be surprised or have to engage in guesswork. If we are able to get people to actually check out their options for themselves at healthcare.gov, they will find out that despite some of the headlines that don't always explain the fact that premiums going up don't necessarily translate into higher premiums for people who are getting tax credits—if they can just see that for themselves, then they will exercise that option. But we're going to have to kind of clear the bugs off the windshield so people can see the road ahead. And that's where you guys come in. That's why what you do is so important. Because there may be people who haven't yet signed up for affordable care, are cynical or skeptical about the marketplace because of all the political noise around, and so they've never actually bothered to take a look to see if this something that they—could help them and something that they can afford.

If you haven't gotten covered yet, now is the time to do it. It's open enrollment season. That means you can go to healthcare.gov and shop for insurance plans in a marketplace where insurers compete for your business. Healthcare.gov is faster and easier to use than ever before. With a few clicks, you can start comparing plans to see which one is right for you and your family. You can even look up your doctor and medications as you shop. Most Americans who get coverage through healthcare.gov can find an option that costs less than $75 a month. That's probably less than your cell phone bill.

That's because our goal wasn't just to make sure more people have coverage, it was to make sure more people have better coverage. And as we continue working to make the system better, there's something you can do to help yourself and help the country. Go to healthcare.gov. Get covered. And if there's someone you care about who hasn't signed up yet, help them get covered today too.

Enrollment is open right now, but only until January 31. If you sign up by December 15, you'll be covered by the beginning of the year. So go check out healthcare.gov or call 1-800-318-2596, and someone will personally help you find a plan that's right for you.

Hi, everybody. It is the most wonderful time of the year and not just because it's the holiday season, but because it's also open enrollment season over at healthcare.gov.

If you're not covered yet, now is the time to sign up. Go tohealthcare.gov and shop for the plan that is right for you. Like most Americans who get coverage through healthcare.gov, there's a good chance you'll find a plan that costs less than $75 a month. And while the enrollment period lasts until the end of January, as long as you sign up by this Thursday, December 15, you'll be covered starting January 1.

We can work together to make the system even better, and one of the best ways to do that is make sure that you're in it. So remember: Sign up on healthcare.gov by this Thursday, and your health insurance will be there for you when you wake up on January 1.

When I came into office, 44 million people were uninsured. Today, we've covered more than 20 million of them. For the first time in our history, more than 90 percent of Americans are insured. In fact, yesterday was the biggest day ever for healthcare.gov. More than 670,000 Americans signed up to get covered, and more are signing up by the day.

Finally, it's this principle of competition that's at the very heart of our health reform. In fact, it's the reason we call it the Affordable Care Act; it makes insurance companies compete for your business, which is helping millions afford the care that helps them get and stay healthy. By the way, it's open enrollment season right now. You can still sign up on healthcare.gov until January 31 and get covered for 2017.

And so a lot of the decisions that are being made are starting to pan out. But we're not out of the woods yet. People are still hurting. And, you know, it is a great privilege for me to have the most interesting job in the world and one where, every once in a while, I'll get a letter from somebody -- you know, I -- I was traveling through Iowa. A woman comes up to me and says, you know what, that healthcare bill you passed, I'm a small business woman, I'm going to take advantage of that credit this year. This is going to help me and I might be able to hire somebody else because you just gave me the chance to get decent healthcare.
SOTELO: But Mr. President, you were able to pass a healthcare plan and you worked a lot for that. And most of my listeners, they haven't seen that, the same way that you worked for healthcare for immigration reform. The same effort.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, here's the difference, Piolín. First of all, on immigration reform, I can't get 100 percent of Democrats. I can get 90 percent of Democrats, but I can't get 100 percent. So with healthcare reform, we were just, like, a vote short, just one vote, and so if we've worked so hard, we could finally tip it over the edge. Right now on immigration reform, we're eight votes short or 10 votes short, so we have do the work behind the scenes to build the groundswell of support that can get us then over the finish line. What I don't wanna do is start this thing like we did several years ago and then it just collapses because if you start it and you don't finish it, then people say, well, this can't be done and four years from now, five years from now, we'll still be talking about immigration reform. What we're trying to do is to build a consensus in the country that says, this is the right thing to do, that we've got some bipartisan support. I've met with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus many times, I've met with immigration rights groups many times. I have not backed off of this issue. Just a few months ago, I gave a speech outlining very clearly my support for comprehensive immigration reform. My cabinet has been working very hard on trying to get it done, but ultimately, I think somebody said the other day, I am president, I am not king. I can't do these things just by myself. We have a system of government that requires the Congress to work with the Executive Branch to make it happen. I'm committed to making it happen, but I've gotta have some partners to do it.
THE PRESIDENT: Ah, but Piolín, look, the truth of the matter is -- here's the question that I think all your listeners have to ask themselves. If the vast majority of Democrats support this issue, if I as the President support this issue, if we've been willing to speak out on this issue forcefully and we have the other party, which not only is not supporting it, but actually doing things that are damaging to the Latino community, then the question I have is why are we spending time talking about us instead of spending time focusing on getting Republicans to do what is right? Because I'm not asking for 100 percent support from Republicans, I'm not asking even for 50 percent support from Republicans. I just want a little bit of support so that I can actually get this thing passed. Now, the fact of the matter is, is that we have worked this issue hard; we will continue to work this hard. I'm only in the first two years of my presidency and, by the way, I had a huge economic crisis. The issues like healthcare reform that we worked on are hugely important to the Latino community. By far, Hispanics are the most likely to work and not have health insurance. The issues of the economy hugely affect the Hispanic community. A lot of them were in construction and when the housing market collapsed, that meant a lot of people were laid off. So it's not as if the issues that we're working on are issues that aren't important to the Latino community. They're very important. Immigration reform is one of those issues we're gonna get it done, but I'm gonna continue to need some help from the other side.
MR. GREGORY: This is a critical moment in the healthcare debate. And you've been able to assess the landscape, you've got a bill now that's working its way through the Senate, you've spoken to Congress. As you assess the situation, I wonder whether you approach this with a minimum threshold of what you'll accept for reform, or at this point have you said, "I've laid out my plan, take it all or nothing"?
PRESIDENT OBAMA: You know, I, I think that my focus is on some core principles. I have to have a plan that is good for middle-class families, who we know last year ended up seeing a 5.5 percent increase in their premiums even though inflation was actually negative on everything else, that have seen a doubling of their premiums over the last decade, that are less secure than ever in terms of the insurance they can actually count on, and more and more of them can't get insurance because of pre-existing conditions or they change jobs or they lost jobs. So it's got to be good for them. Now, the principles that we've talked about--making sure that there's an insurance exchange that'll allow people to buy in and get health insurance and negotiate as a big pool to drive down costs, making sure that we have insurance reforms that make sure you can still get health insurance even if you've got a pre-existing condition, cap out of pocket expenses and so forth--those core things that make insurance a better deal for American consumers; making sure that it's deficit-neutral both now and in the future, making sure that it is driving down healthcare inflation so that we can actually deal with our long-term budget deficits, those are the core principles that are critical to me. And I actually think that we've agreed to about 80 percent of that, if you look at all the bills that are coming through all these committees. The key is now just to narrow those differences. And if I don't feel like it is a good deal for the American people, then I won't sign a bill.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, what--no. No, that's not true. What I, what I've said is the public option I think should be a part of this, but we shouldn't think that somehow that's the silver bullet that solves health care. What I've said, for example, on what's called an individual mandate--during the campaign I said, "Look, if health care is affordable, then I think people will buy it." So we don't have to say to folks, "you know what, you have to buy health care." And when I talk to healthcare experts on both the left and the right, what they tell me is that even after you make health care affordable, there's still going to be some folks out there who, whether out of inertia or they just don't want to spend the money, would rather take their chances. Unfortunately, what that means is then you and I and every American out there who has health insurance and they're paying their premiums responsibly every month, they've got to pick up the costs for emergency room care when one of those people gets sick. So what we've said is as long as we're making this genuinely affordable to families, then you've got an obligation to get health care just like you have an obligation to get auto insurance in every state.
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, that--I mean, that's an example of a, of a hard choice, because that's not necessarily wildly popular, but it's the right thing to do. You know, I, I have said that it is very important that we take into account the concerns of doctors and nurses who, by the way, support our efforts. And I--and that's something that doesn't get noticed much. The people who are most involved in the healthcare system know that it's got to be reformed. But I've said that we've got to take into account their concerns about medical malpractice. Now, that's not popular in my party, never has been. But I've talked to enough doctors to know that even though it's not the end-all, be-all of driving down healthcare costs, it's very important to providers to make sure that their costs are going down. So I think there are going to be a whole series of Republican ideas, ideas from my opponents during the campaign that we have incorporated and adopted. And this is hard. And, and, you know, one of the things I've always said is if this had been easy, it would've been taken care of by Teddy Roosevelt.
MR. GREGORY: This healthcare debate, as you well know, can sometimes be about bigger things. And, and among your harshest critics...
George Stephanopoulos: He's probably talking about healthcare.
The President: Well, and if he's talking about healthcare, then I think what I'd say is, "Talk to all those people out there right now who have lost their healthcare during the course of this year because they've lost their jobs." Or all the small businesses have seen the premiums that they're paying going up 20-25 percent.
The reason I tackled healthcare wasn't because this was my personal hobbyhorse. The reason I tackled it was during the course of the campaign, I traveled all across this country and I kept on hearing heart-breaking stories about families who were bankrupt because they got sick. If they had health insurance, suddenly insurance companies were doing things that were just plain wrong, and were leaving folks in an extremely vulnerable position.
And I was talking to businesses who said this was unsustainable. And, by the way, when I got here and I looked at how we were going to get control of our long-term debt, I realized that there was no way for us to control our long-term debt unless we reformed how our healthcare system works.
Here's the problem, though. If we didn't take on healthcare, then when were we going to take it on? And if we don't take it on, then when are we going to say to families when -- 2 years from now; 3 years from now; 4 years from now -- their premiums have gone up 30-40%? And have eaten into their wages. And in some cases, their health care's been dropped altogether
What am I going to say to the small businesses who just decide, "We can't afford to provide healthcare to our employees?"
So we've got big challenges. Fundamental challenges. Not just around healthcare, but around the fact that we have an energy system that is archaic and involves us sending billions of dollars to other countries.
Now, we're also gonna have to make sure that we continue to drive down health care costs in medicare and medicaid, and that's part of what healthcare reform was all about last year. There is a contrasting vision. And you know, the Republicans in the house voted last week a system that would voucherize the medicare program so that basically seniors couldn't count on medicare being there, they would get a certain amount of money and if insurance companies said "you know what, that's not enough to buy you converge," you'd be out of luck. And I think that's the wrong way to go. I think we can make changes to the healthcare system that's smarter and works better without changing medicare in a fundamental way.

That's progress. It means that seniors everywhere are getting the care they need for less. And if you have questions about what benefits you're entitled to, you can go to www.medicare.gov to find out.

To put that in context, there were five times more users in the marketplace this morning than have ever been on medicare.gov at one time. That gives you a sense of how important this is to millions of Americans around the country, and that's a good thing. And we're going to be speeding things up in the next few hours to handle all this demand that exceeds anything that we had expected.
The President. Right. And as I said before, if I were designing the system from scratch, that would probably make more sense. We are the only country on earth—not the only country on earth but we are one of the few countries that has this weird amalgam of private sector and medicare and sort of a patchwork system, hugely inefficient. We spend more than any of the other advanced countries, our outcomes aren't necessarily better. But the notion that we were just going to scrap the existing healthcare system which is a sixth of our economy, it employs millions of people and—that wasn't going to happen.

