There's also a need for us to recognize that you don't have to have scarce and exotic drugs like heroin before somebody can be damaged, because barbiturates, for instance, are by far the major cause of death among all drugs, and they are prescribed sometimes. Sometimes they are not even controlled by prescription. So, a comprehensive analysis of the entire drug field, including both alcohol and the addictive and non-addictive drugs, plus a treatment of those who are damaged by the drugs, will be a part of our prevention program, our crime control problem, our community treatment program, and also our comprehensive health program.
I want to be sure that our cities are strong, that the housing programs, transportation programs, control of crime, job opportunities are centered for a change in the areas that have been deteriorating in the past but which will come to life in the future.
Obviously, the number one contributing factor to crime of all kinds, in my opinion, is high unemployment among young people, particularly those who are black or Spanish-speaking or in a minority age or group where they have such a difficult time getting jobs in times of economic problems.
I was living in Atlanta as Governor, and Detroit was known as the murder capital of the Nation. In the last 2 years alone, with the good work of your mayor and with close cooperation from officials in the suburban areas, the State government, and particularly the police, the murder rate has been reduced 64 percent. And the crime rate in Detroit in the last year has dropped 21 percent--the greatest reduction in crime of any major city in the whole country.
One of the major contributing factors to the dramatic reduction in crime that does permit the children to walk to school and does permit people to go out on the front porch at night without being fearful is the close relationship between people who live in a neighborhood and the police officers who serve there.
I rode in from the airport today with the mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, and I asked him, "How in the world have you and the police officers had such an unprecedented reduction in the crime rate?" And he said that one of the major reasons is that the police officers now are closely related to the community in which they serve. And they become friends of the people who live there, and eventually that friendship is reciprocated.
Quite often in a community that is very poor, that is going downhill, the people distrust the police officers and look on them almost as enemies instead of friends. I think that that permanent, friendly, mutually supportive relationship with the police officials among the neighbors who live in that community is a very vital part that can prevent a deterioration. Obviously, our public works programs, the community development programs, the housing programs, the red-lining programs, the crime control programs will be of help.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
Today, what Pope John XXIII called "the first and essential cell of human society"—that is, a family—is in trouble. Many families have already been strained to the breaking point by social and economic forces beyond their own control. Some families indeed have broken. The tragic results are all around us, in alcoholism, drug addiction, social alienation, and crime.
There are many other areas of domestic policy--housing, health, crime, education, agriculture, and others--that will concern me as President but which I do not have time to discuss tonight.
THE PRESIDENT. I have discussed this with Attorney General Bell, and he has not yet evolved to present to me a comprehensive approach to the organized crime question. But I'd have to give you an answer to that after the press conference.1 I don't know what the status of his effort is, Mr. Sperling.
At his news conference, the President said he assigned a high priority on fighting organized crime and promised to elaborate on his position after he had a chance to review the status of this effort with Attorney General Bell.
The President is informed by the Attorney General that Peter Flaherty, whose nomination to be Deputy Attorney General advanced in the Senate today, will have overall supervision over Justice Department efforts in fighting crime. To this end, Flaherty will bear the prime responsibility for the activities of the Criminal Division of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, and the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Both the President and the Attorney General endorse the principle of concentrating Federal law enforcement efforts on attacking large, organized crime operations, instead of focusing on minor offenders. They are particularly concerned about curtailing the activities of large-scale narcotics traffickers. In this connection, a study is underway on the advisability of making the Drug Enforcement Administration part of the FBI as a means of stepping up the fight against narcotics.
They believe these efforts must take place with the close involvement of local and State law enforcement agencies, since this is where most of the resources for fighting crime are located. The administration looks in this regard toward a national program in which all levels of government would cooperate to produce the maximum reduction of crime.
The administration also places a high priority on fighting white-collar crime. To promote this effort, programs will shortly begin within the FBI to train and recruit more accountants, computer specialists, and other experts, so as to increase the FBI's effectiveness in uncovering and successfully helping to prosecute intricate fraud, financial manipulations, and other white-collar crime.
The Attorney General will report to the President as aspects of his anti-crime program are developed.
THE PRESIDENT. I think quite high. When I was Governor, we organized a substantial effort to fight organized crime. And we detected the interrelationship between gambling, which a lot of people assume is just a normal part of life, prostitution, which some people think is not too bad, the distribution of drugs, which is condemned by almost everyone, and other forms of illegalities. And the upshot of our analysis was that they are very closely interrelated.
Profits from gambling, profits from prostitution and other more acceptable kinds of crime, in some people's minds, are directly used to enhance the distribution of heroin and other drugs. So, I think it is a very serious problem. It is one that we ought to address from a national level. And one of the crucial elements that can be improved is to have local, State, and Federal law enforcement agencies cooperate in a much more effective fashion in exchange of ideas and information and, also, in the prosecution of criminals.
We seek to encourage international travel, and we must take greater account of problems that transcend national borders. Drugs and international crime, including terrorism, challenge traditional concepts of diplomacy. For the well-being of our peoples, we must cooperate on these issues. With each passing year they will occupy a more and more central place in our deliberations.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you are presupposing guilt before a trial. It's obvious to me that members of the Government, in the military, the CIA and the FBI and the Oval Office, if a crime is committed, need to have that crime investigated. And if they're determined to be guilty, they should be punished. No special excuse should be given for officials in the FBI. I don't know the details of the case. I've not been briefed on it and have no reason to be. I have encouraged Attorney General Griffin Bell, who needs no encouragement, to enforce the law enthusiastically.
This will make it very difficult for high Government officials to have interests which conflict with those of the public. And we should insist on the same high standards for private institutions. That's why I proposed to Congress making foreign bribery by American companies and officials a crime.
There's also a need for us to recognize that you don't have to have scarce and exotic drugs like heroin before somebody can be damaged, because barbiturates, for instance, are by far the major cause of death among all drugs, and they are prescribed sometimes. Sometimes they are not even controlled by prescription. So, a comprehensive analysis of the entire drug field, including both alcohol and the addictive and non-addictive drugs, plus a treatment of those who are damaged by the drugs, will be a part of our prevention program, our crime control problem, our community treatment program, and also our comprehensive health program.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the only comment that I am free to make under our own system of government is that I hope that justice will prevail; that the ones who are accused of a crime will be given a fair trial; if they are found guilty, that they will be punished in accordance with normal procedures for an equivalent crime committed.
I want to be sure that our cities are strong, that the housing programs, transportation programs, control of crime, job opportunities are centered for a change in the areas that have been deteriorating in the past but which will come to life in the future.
Obviously, the number one contributing factor to crime of all kinds, in my opinion, is high unemployment among young people, particularly those who are black or Spanish-speaking or in a minority age or group where they have such a difficult time getting jobs in times of economic problems.
I'm from the Sun Belt States. I think there's been too much of a channeling of Federal moneys into Sun Belt areas. I think between the downtown ghetto areas on crime control, housing development, and so forth, the funds have quite often been channeled off into the suburbs because of more highly educated people, better organized people, more able to speak loudly and who understood the complexities of Federal programs. We're trying to change that and focus the attention of the Government, whatever it is, on the downtown, urban, deteriorating neighborhoods.
And on crime, I think the major cause of crime in those downtown areas is unemployment, and we're trying to focus on this question. We've got now about 1.1 million jobs allotted during the summertime for young people, much more than ever has been before.
Obviously, we've got a long way to go in law enforcement. I think, to a substantial degree, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration funds have been wasted in years gone by. We are trying to bring a more narrow focusing on them to prevent crime and to get out of the waste of buying very expensive and fancy machines and so forth and actually concentrate in the areas where the crime rate is highest.
I think I've seen statistics lately from the FBI and others that show that there's a general reduction in the crime rate. I think there's a better tone in the country, a little bit more trust in the Government. This was certainly subverted by the evidence in New York earlier this month. But I think, in general, throughout the country there's more of a respect being built up for public officials--not because of anything I've done, but just because we've recovered partially from the embarrassment of Watergate and the CIA and the Vietnam war and so forth.
Standing behind me is a woman, Ms. Hallinan, who in 1917 stood outside the gates of the White House when Woodrow Wilson was President, simply holding a sign in her hand that was photographed, saying, "How long will it be before women can have freedom?" She was convicted of a crime and jailed. Although we've come a long way since then, we still have a long way to go.
One of the most serious problems that faces our country, of course, is that of rampant crime. And we know from experience and from examining the statistics that almost half of the crimes are committed by juveniles. We also realize that, unfortunately, in our country there has been an absence of adequate distinction between those juveniles who commit serious crimes, such as murder, rape, robbery, on the one hand, and those who commit crimes that are no threat to their neighbors, like being a runaway child.
In many communities .of our country, these two kinds of crimes--one serious and one not very serious--are treated the same, and young people have been incarcerated for long periods of time, who have committed offenses that would not even be a crime at all if they were adult. It costs about $12,000 a year to keep a young person in prison. This act very wisely draws a sharp distinction between these two kinds of crimes. It also encourages local administrators, States, and local governments to deinstitutionalize those young people who have not committed serious crimes.
I'm very proud of the work that has been done. As you may or may not have heard, some of the Senators are not able to show up this morning because of other business before their body. I'm particularly sorry that Senator Bayh can't be here. He's been very instrumental in the passage of this act. But we have some of the Members of the House behind me who have been very effective in dealing with this very serious problem of juvenile crime--Congressman Pepper and others.
REPRESENTATIVE PEPPER. Mr. President, we are so grateful for your recognition of the importance of trying to preserve from the area of criminality the younger people of the country. We realize that any approach to the problem of crime is a very difficult one. We've tried the orthodox approach. I wish we could, in the future, put more emphasis upon the preventive aspects of crime. And I believe we can do that best by trying to stop school dropouts, trying to provide jobs for the younger people, perhaps after school, in the summers, give them incentives to do creative and constructive work and to live useful lives.
I'm convinced that if we could put into effect an effective, adequate preventive program, we could reduce crime in this country at least 25 percent. I hope this is a good beginning in that direction.
I want to again thank all of you for coming. I think it's a good step forward today. And I believe that if this program can be administered effectively through LEAA and through the Department of HEW, that we'll have a good program that will take our Nation forward on fighting crime, and particularly among the young people of our Nation.
I wish that everyone here could go to the South Bronx area of New York where I visited earlier this week and see the devastation there. It's absolutely heartbreaking, and I realize after campaigning throughout this country that this is not a unique area. There are other urban areas like this where crime is rampant, where living conditions that we all take for granted are completely absent, where deterioration diminishes hope, and where there's an ingrained distrust of the concern and the ability of government to meet legitimate needs.
Human degradation, oppression and deprivation, as rationalized and perpetuated in southern Africa by the racist regimes there, is a crime against which not only Africa but all mankind as a whole must fight.
I was living in Atlanta as Governor, and Detroit was known as the murder capital of the Nation. In the last 2 years alone, with the good work of your mayor and with close cooperation from officials in the suburban areas, the State government, and particularly the police, the murder rate has been reduced 64 percent. And the crime rate in Detroit in the last year has dropped 21 percent--the greatest reduction in crime of any major city in the whole country.
One of the major contributing factors to the dramatic reduction in crime that does permit the children to walk to school and does permit people to go out on the front porch at night without being fearful is the close relationship between people who live in a neighborhood and the police officers who serve there.
I rode in from the airport today with the mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, and I asked him, "How in the world have you and the police officers had such an unprecedented reduction in the crime rate?" And he said that one of the major reasons is that the police officers now are closely related to the community in which they serve. And they become friends of the people who live there, and eventually that friendship is reciprocated.
Quite often in a community that is very poor, that is going downhill, the people distrust the police officers and look on them almost as enemies instead of friends. I think that that permanent, friendly, mutually supportive relationship with the police officials among the neighbors who live in that community is a very vital part that can prevent a deterioration. Obviously, our public works programs, the community development programs, the housing programs, the red-lining programs, the crime control programs will be of help.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
This bill will go a long way to eliminating fraud in the administration of the health care programs of our country. It will shift to heavier penalties for those who are convicted of false claims, kickbacks--changing these from misdemeanors to felonies--and also prohibiting those who are convicted of this crime from delivering any services in the future.
In my speech in Los Angeles, I pointed out for instance in Czechoslovakia that recently there have been four people tried there as dissidents. Their only crime was that they dissented from what government action has been taken.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, almost every item that's in the domestic budget is directly helpful to the major cities. We proposed hundreds of millions of dollars for basic education, for training programs, for public service jobs, for transportation, for housing, for crime control.
Obviously there are some instances in the military and otherwise when a heinous crime, when committed by someone under orders, should be punished. But I think in this case the Attorney General made the right decision.
We're providing direct payments to neighborhood groups and organizations, like those here in Watts, for community crime control, to repair housing, and for neighborhood development.
Our starting point in ensuring justice is to reduce crime through measures that are effective and fair.
There was encouraging progress in this direction last year, when the volume of crime fell for the first time in many years by 4 percent below the previous year's level. It's a welcome development, but it does not change the urgent need to control crime. States and local governments must take the lead in this effort, but the Federal Government must do its part.
We are working with congressional leaders to reorganize the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency, to gear our funding system to our most pressing needs, to provide better support for State and local governments, and to concentrate our help on improving the criminal justice system and reducing crime. I'll propose a consolidation and a reorganization of many of the functions now performed by more than 110 different Federal agencies that have direct responsibility for law enforcement.
We can reduce the tremendous overload on our criminal justice system by removing such crimes as drunkenness and vagrancy from the courts, thereby freeing' the courts to deal with serious offenses and enabling us to treat these social illnesses in ways that offer a greater hope of success than conviction and incarceration.
I'm supporting uniform sentencing standards for Federal offenses, which will make the punishment for crimes more rational and fair and will help ensure that the rich and the poor are treated alike, no matter what court might convict them.
Powerful white-collar criminals cheat consumers of millions of dollars; public officials who abuse their high rank damage the integrity of our Nation in profound and longlasting ways. But too often, these bigshot crooks escape the full consequences of their acts. Justice must be blind to rank, power, and position. The Justice Department is now undertaking a major new effort on white-collar crime.
We must remove the economic barriers to justice. When a poor family is cheated by a merchant, unfairly threatened with eviction, falsely accused of a crime, it can very rarely take advantage of the skilled legal talent at reasonable rates.
Using that as a yardstick, you could say that with the national population of over 180 million, we could realize about $108 million. The end result would be a healthier nation, due to more money or less crime—either way the Nation wins. As I see it, the only opposition to this type of program would be the chronic offenders. What's your comment?
So, bringing some quality into the entire judicial system and crime control is a very great commitment of my own administration.
We were pleased last year to see the overall crime rate drop for the first time in many years. It dropped 4 percent. Perhaps this is an omen of things to come.
One of the reasons that the crime rate did drop, in my opinion, is the much tighter control over the habit-forming drugs that were coming into our country. Under the leadership of Dr. Peter Bourne, who heads up my drug abuse program in the White House, we worked out an agreement with the new President of Mexico, Lopez Portillo, to hold down the production and the distribution in our country of heroin derived from poppies that were being grown in the mountain areas of Mexico. Lopez Portillo is committed to controlling this source of crime in our country as much as I am. So, we worked out with him a means to cut down the opium smuggling into the United States from Mexico by 90 percent. It means now that the opium sold on our city streets is much less pure. It's much more expensive, and just that fact alone has helped to cut down many of the violent crimes.
So, your recommendation that we use money from the court system itself to finance a better criminal justice system is a very good idea. But I would like for you to give your name and address over here so that we can give you a complete analysis of what I hope to do to cut down crime in our country and to make our criminal court system, our entire bar association more responsive to the needs of our people.
Thank you very much.
I know in Georgia, for instance, the distributive education students have taken on a special project of exposing and helping to control shoplifting, a very strong contribution to controlling crime in our country. There might be equivalent opportunities in all the States of our Nation.
There is an opportunity through volunteer work for you in effect to adopt as a friend some person who has been in prison, perhaps a young person who's now been paroled or placed on probation. Quite often the reasons for their earlier crime is that they are alienated from society. They don't have an access to the stable part, the productive part, the enlightened part of the American community. And working with qualified officials, you could say, "Let me be responsible as kind of a big brother or a big sister just for one person, and I'll try to understand what I can do for them."
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
There is a duality in culpability among those who commit some crime. I'm speaking in generalities now. One is the actual criminal case where you punish someone for abusing another person. Sometimes the abuse extends to the death of the victim. Another element of criminality is the violation of the American civil rights act, where a person's rights are deprived, even the loss of life.
If in the judgment of the Attorney General-and he makes the judgment, I don't—the original case is not adequately pursued, nor the punishment, if meted out, adequate for the crime, if there's a gross abuse of that, then the Attorney General reserves the right to enter the case and try the perpetrator of the crime on the basis of a civil rights violation.
He has not committed a crime, he has not violated the law, but the image of impropriety, resulting from the acceptance by his children of a substantial gift, leads me to think that it would be better if he did resign. I understand that Friday, Mr. Gartner called my staff members and said that he did not intend to resign.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have looked into it much more thoroughly than I had before I came to the last press conference. The report I made last time was basically accurate, that he had reported voluntarily the acceptance of the gift to his children, that the Senate Agriculture Committee had been thoroughly conversant with this fact, and that the Senate committee and the Senate itself had confirmed him, that he had not committed any crime. I believe, though, in light of the fact that there is an allegation of impropriety on his part, with which I agree, that he should resign.
Every American is concerned about crime and every American is a potential victim of crime. But that's only part of our concern. Crime destroys the essential fabric of our society in ways that go far beyond individual suffering and loss. In that sense, we are all victims. If our communities are to be vibrant and safe, our people cannot live in fear. We cannot let criminals control our lives.
The primary responsibility for controlling crime rests with local and State officials, but the Federal Government can and does provide essential and effective support. Within the last year, we have made some progress in reducing crime. New jobs have been created. Crime rates in almost every category have gone down, but the rates are still too high and crime is still of grave concern to me and other Americans. There is clearly more that the Federal Government can and should do to solve this problem. Working in partnership with State and local governments, community organizations, and concerned citizens, we can make a safer America.
The proposals that I am sending to Congress today will make the Federal Government a more effective and competent partner in the fight against crime.
Second, we will strengthen the partnership already enhanced by our urban policy between the Federal Government on the one hand and State and local communities on the other. For the first time hundreds of cities and counties will have the flexibility to decide how their LEAA funds can best be used to attack crime in their own communities and will receive fixed allocations of LEAA funds for that purpose. In addition, we will target resources to those areas of the country with especially severe crime problems.
Third, we will consolidate and strengthen research and statistics programs within the Department of Justice. A National Institute of Justice will be created to replace several different research units now located in the Department of Justice. It will be charged with conducting independent studies to determine how we can best solve our criminal and civil justice problems. A Bureau of Justice Statistics will be created to provide for the first time a central focus for the gathering and analysis of statistics concerning crime and concerning our justice system.
The Federal effort to help State and local governments solve their crime programs cannot be limited, however, to just improving LEAA. A sensitivity to the crime problem must be part of other Federal programs which affect the daily lives of our citizens.
Several of the Federal agencies which have been involved in our urban policy will be pooling $32 million over the next year to develop, for instance, an improved anticrime program for public housing projects. Funds will be provided by the CETA program for training and education to hire local residents for such important, preventive jobs as manning elevators and patrolling unguarded areas where the crime rate has been very high. Recreation facilities will be built by Interior Department funds for the men, women, children who reside in these projects. And LEAA funds will be provided for counseling and for other services for juveniles living in public housing projects who might be influenced or tempted to resort to a life of crime.
The programs I've announced today will have a beneficial effect on our crime problem. But if we are to be successful, we also need the support of each of the distinguished leaders who are here today from State and local governments, from community and neighborhood groups.
We have the knowledge, the ability, the determination, the commitment, and the influence, and using these more effective programs, our common effort can continue to reduce the excessive crime rate in our Nation.
We've been somewhat delayed on revamping and revising the LEAA because it's complex. And we started out, because of some of the things they'd done in the past, with the idea that maybe it should be abolished. We finally decided the thing to do was to refurbish it in a way to take out wasted overhead on local, State, and Federal levels, and on the Federal level we reduced the payroll by 15 percent since we've been here, number one. Number two, take the fat out, not spend any more money on boondoggles, but to be sure that the money goes to the process of deterring and eliminating crime.
I think there are few issues which are of greater concern to the American people than their own safety and security. I think all of us are very mindful that the people who suffer the most in terms of crime are the really powerless people in our society, whether it's in the urban areas or in rural communities or in suburban areas. Usually they're the senior citizens, the poor, the disadvantaged people. I think this legislation represents the best judgment of those that have been interested in the issues of crime in the Senate. It has strong bipartisan support in the Senate. It recognizes the importance of corrections and rehabilitation.
Mr. President, I suppose if I don't make this short, I'm going to be charged with some kind of a crime, this tremendous heat we're under here. But I do want to tell you, Mr. President, that your administration is to be applauded for having undertaken a real review, an intense study of LEAA and the total problem of crime. I think we understand—and I know that this understanding comes as the result of many consultations on the part of the Attorney General, members of your administration, and other interested people—that we can't really successfully fight crime or really understand the causes of crime until we get the people involved. And I think that this bill, this proposal, certainly aims to do that.
First of all, it's a restructuring of LEAA. And being called the Justice Improvement Act of 1978, I think, is a hopeful sign, because I think that is what it's going to be. The innovative features of the National Institute of Justice for the purposes of doing tremendous amount of research so that the States which have principal responsibility may be given the kinds of information that may set up the kinds of guidelines that will help us to understand crime, the cause of crime, and then to prevent it. And the same way with setting up the Bureau of Statistics, which I think is important.
There was talk a long time ago in 1968 of how we were going to successfully wage this battle against crime, and we've seen that spending money wasn't the answer alone. There's got to be a total dedication, a total commitment. It won't be dollars alone. It's got to be people with understanding. And the anticrime community program, the setting up of priorities for those programs that work, removing some of the redtape, that's all going to be, I think, in the right direction.
I pledge myself to a total commitment to helping, because I think that while it may be one of those areas that seems to get a low rating when the people of America are asked what is the problem that they consider most paramount, nonetheless, I think in the hearts and minds of most of the people of America is this question: Why can't we get rid of crime? Why do we have to be afraid to walk the streets of America? Why do we have to be afraid each time to go out as free citizens?
THE PRESIDENT. I mentioned earlier that we have made, I think, substantial, detectable, provable progress in almost every aspect of crime statistics in the last 12 months. The Attorney General has been trying to contribute to this progress in recent days. The circuit court judge ruled that he would not have to go to jail, which does help in one category of holding down the crime statistics, and I want to express my personal congratulations to Griffin so far on his good progress. [Laughter]
I think that the next and the last speaker is indicative or representative of the effort that all the Cabinet members have made. Perhaps one of the prime causes for the reduction in the crime rate in the last 12 months has been the reduction in the number of people who are unemployed. We have almost 2 million fewer people unemployed now than we did when this administration took over, and we've had a net increase of 6.4 million jobs, which means that people can now earn their living rather than turn to a life of crime for the illegal acquisition of goods or money.
We have this morning a very important demonstration in Pat Harris, Secretary of the Housing and Urban Development Department, of what can be done in public housing. A very tiny portion of public housing in our country has been the focal point of excessive crime perpetrated on the residents there. And I would like to call now on Secretary Harris to explain in closing what she is doing as one of the members of the Cabinet to help in a concerted, broad-scaled approach in our country to hold down the crime rate and to correct this defect in our democratic society. Secretary Pat Harris.
You know the names of these places as well as I do—Columbia Point in Boston, Stella Wright in Newark, Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago, Hunter's Point in San Francisco, Carmelitos in Los Angeles, West Dallas in Dallas. They are a very small part of the public housing program, but they account for 100 percent of the public's negative image of the program. These problem projects are often breeding grounds for crime, vandalism, delinquency, and despair. They are places that no one here would want to live in, to work in, or to raise a family in.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, it's hard for me to define in a brief period of time what is a political prisoner. I think that if there is a commission of crime involving violence, damage to another person's property or health or life, and if they are prosecuted for that under the rules of our Government, that would certainly not come under the categorization of a political prisoner. What we deplore in the Soviet Union is the prosecution of persons who speak out, even in accordance with international agreements that have been signed by the country involved.
I served as Governor before I became President, and I've seen at first hand the superb, young leadership exemplified by Jim Hunt. He still works closely with me. And as we have recently decided to try to make more effective the joint effort of local officials, State officials, and Federal officials in controlling crime, Jim Hunt has been in the leadership among the 50 Governors who helped to make these programs control crime better.
Of course, Democrats have always believed in service, but carefully budgeted, efficiently delivered service. We can cut crime, we can build roads, we can deliver jobs, we can feed our people without huge deficits if we eliminate the waste and the bloat in government. This is responsible leadership. This is sound fiscal policy, and the American people know it.
Mount Vernon Avenue, as you know, in years gone by, has been one of the worst places with the worst reputation, perhaps, in the Columbus area. It was a place where housing was not good. It was a place where sanitation was not good. It was a place where health conditions were not good. It was a place where crime was high. And then you, the people of this area, decided to do something about it. Now you've got an area that's safe, healthy, clean, beautiful, and it's going to be even better in the future.
Florida needs a man who, as Governor, will be dedicated to law enforcement, to eliminate the threat of crime that causes concern among all those who live in this beautiful State. And Florida needs a man who can join with the Members of Congress in the great State legislature to make sure that our elderly citizens, our retired citizens still have an enjoyable, secure, and fruitful life, to let their own existence be meaningful as long as they live on this Earth. That man is Bob Graham. I hope you'll help him get elected.
California needs an attorney general who's tough, competent, concerned about crime control, who will work with the United States Attorney General to control crime in your State. It'll be a great pleasure to have her as a partner with us, controlling crime and protecting the lives of people here.
There are legitimate roles for a government to perform: to assure that our Nation lives in peace; to assure that our people have an opportunity for employment, for jobs, to use what talent God might have given them in a sustained and productive way; to eliminate the threats to society, to the family—drugs, crime; to initiate preventive health care; to provide for better education, transportation, security; to cut down on some of the afflictions, such as unwanted pregnancies that lead to abortions, things that deeply religious people and others deplore; to raise the ideals of individuals; and to sustain the ideals and morals of a nation itself.
Martin Luther King, Jr.'s dream lives among us today. But too many individual dreams have died. In rat-ridden slums and decaying homes and rotting neighborhoods, dreams are dying. There are still hundreds of thousands of young people, many of them minority youth, in our country who have never had a chance to hold a decent job. They learn in our streets, not in our schools. And they learn about drugs and alcohol and crime and not about religion or medicine or mathematics or law. We cannot permit another generation of Americans to grow up with no hope.
We must guard against the abuse of our own religious faith. We have seen broad changes in history. In the first few centuries after Christ's life and death on this Earth, it was a crime to be a Christian. I've been reading Barbara Tuchman's delightful history of the 14th century era. And during those days, it was a crime not to be a Christian. And the horrors of the Inquisition, the equation of a Christian commitment with a willingness to be a constant, dedicated warrior, a complete dependence on combat and bloodshed, and the abuses within the Christian Church are vividly expressed. And I'm sure at that time, there was a rationalization among devout religious believers that what we look on now with abhorrence, and sometimes so remotely with amusement, was the true teaching of Christ. And we must avoid a distortion or a rationalization because of materialistic inclinations in our own hearts, of our own religious faith and its beliefs. When any religion impacts adversely on those whom Christ described as "the least of these," it can have no firm foundation in God's sight.
THE PRESIDENT. This has been one of the most exciting and gratifying experiences that I've had since I've been President. The cooperation there has been superb, and there has been a drastic reduction in the trafficking of drugs across the border. Also, we've helped each other by having a much more effective control of smuggling and other violation of border law and customs. This permits a great enhancement of mutual trust, also helps to control crime and, at the same time, promotes the benefits of legitimate trade and commerce. So, I'm very pleased.
Modern Israel came into being in the wake of that historic crime, the enormity of which is almost beyond human comprehension. I know that Israel is committed and determined, above all, that nothing like it must ever, ever be permitted to happen again on Earth.
In addition to making possible the exercise and enjoyment of all other rights, the pursuit of the right and the enforcement of personal safety and freedom from crime does not require compromise or sacrifice of constitutional rights or civil liberties. As the Department of Justice's proposed legislative charter for the FBI-which is a dominant goal and priority of our efforts in Congress—just as it demonstrates, strengthening law enforcement and enhancing civil liberties are consistent and complementary and mutually supportive goals.
It is a serious crime, it is a felony to put a tap on an American citizen's telephone, to bug an American citizen without a written permission from the Attorney General or the President. Obviously there was no written permission.
This is an awesome responsibility that you have performed. I asked this group to recommend a fitting memorial in the United States to the victims of the most unspeakable crime in all of human history—the Holocaust. Rarely has a Presidential commission faced a more sobering or a more difficult or a more totally important challenge. This event of the Holocaust, the crime against humanity itself, has no parallel in human history. A philosopher wrote that human language itself breaks down when confronted with the monstrous challenge of describing this evil.
Out of our memory and understanding of the Holocaust, we must forge an unshakable oath with all civilized people that never again will the world stand silent, never again will the world look the other way or fail to act in time to prevent this terrible crime of genocide.
We often see tragic results among those we love—disillusionment, cynicism, alienation-sometimes leading to self-debasement, crime, and violence. This does not have to be. These times of rapid and complex change demand that we turn to that which does not ever change—the spiritual strength to grow together; to find unity as a nation, as a human family—and I believe we will.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the crime rate goes up and down. For a while, since I've been in office, it's gone downward, and lately, in some cities at least, it's gone upward. We have tried to work more closely with the local and State officials. The primary responsibility for the enforcement of the law in a given community lies with local officials, first of all, State officials secondly, and with the Federal Government coming in to participate in some types of crime which involve interstate violations of the commerce laws or the violation of basic civil rights.
So, the effort to prevent white-collar crimes, to enforce the antitrust laws and others, I think, have been very successful. We've prosecuted and concluded longstanding cases involving illicit surveillance of citizens and other sensitive matters that were left over from previous administrations adequately. So, I think that's the best analysis I can give you.
We still have a serious problem with crime. One of the factors that's impossible to assess is how much a better reporting system affects the number of crimes reported. My guess is that there's a much more efficient way now to have an accurate count of the number of crimes committed. I say none of this with apology for the excessively high crime rate, but we're doing the best we can under difficult circumstances.
This city enjoys the special beauty and the cultural advantages of being the Nation's Capital. And you've coped well with the special responsibilities of being an international center. But hometown Washington must also correct or prevent problems that you share with other cities throughout this country—such as urban decay, poverty, crime, and unemployment. You manage this and you manage it well, because you have a special kind of determination which has sustained this community despite generations of deprivation of basic human rights.
Also working together, we've developed a plan to transfer authority to prosecute local crimes from the United States attorney's office to the District Government. Legislation to bring this transfer about will be a top priority for my administration. Other cities have control over their local criminal justice system, and so should the people who live in the District of Columbia.
Today, what Pope John XXIII called "the first and essential cell of human society"—that is, a family—is in trouble. Many families have already been strained to the breaking point by social and economic forces beyond their own control. Some families indeed have broken. The tragic results are all around us, in alcoholism, drug addiction, social alienation, and crime.
We have a time of great difficulty in our country. And here in the White House, as President, of course, I have to be primarily concerned about our Nation's security, about defense, about the maintenance of peace. But that responsibility cannot be separated from my own as the chief law enforcement officer of our country, and the preservation of justice, fairness, equity, the control of crime, the enhancement of respect among every citizen of our Nation for our governmental processes. You have very difficult jobs as local police officials, as State officials, as attorneys general, as representatives of the Federal Government in the control of drug traffic, in education, and in administration.
You've got a partner in the Oval Office, and I am here to back you up in the enforcement of the law. I recognize the difficulties that you face in a rapidly changing world. And I know that you've had a full day, specifically concentrating on two types of crime: arson and heroin traffic. Arson is the fastest growing crime, I believe, in the Nation. And we've had some success in controlling heroin. I think, in just recent times, we have cut heroin deaths down approximately 80 percent in our country, but we have a threat of another buildup in heroin supplies coming in from Southwest Asia.
When a crime is committed, it causes severe loss and it causes personal pain or even death, as you know. And it also causes our societal structure to be weakened. It causes an alienation between the public that we are charged to protect and the public whose lives we are designed and charged with enhancing.
This division, not only among different levels of government but between government and citizens of our Nation, has a farreaching, adverse effect on our Nation's strength. I hope that this session that you've had today, dealing with two specific elements of crime, will be the precursor for others and for a removal of barriers among us and for the realization that you have total support not only from the White House Oval Office, but also from the Attorney General, the FBI, the DEA, and other law enforcement officials and offices and bureaus in the Federal Government.
How do you make the schools better? How do you care for mentally retarded or mentally afflicted Americans? How do you make the life of senior citizens more secure and pleasant and productive? How do you assure that homes are built where they're needed? How do you assure that crime is controlled? How can you assure that a working person can get to and from the job with a minimum of delay and most efficiently? How can you make sure that we don't waste energy now that it's become so important? How can you make sure that a community can keep jobs available with new investments and be dynamic and aggressive and not shrivel up and die? How can you make sure that change strengthens us, instead of making us weak? How can you keep confidence in the future when we face problems that we all recognize?
But we are an aggrieved party, and it's important that the American people not forget that militant terrorists, with the permission and encouragement of the official Government of Iran, are holding captive innocent American citizens in violation of every international law, diplomatic processes, and human decency. It's a crime, and to me it's just as much a crisis now as it was the first week the hostages were captured.
The fact is, though, that a horrible crime, as measured by international law, by diplomatic custom, and against humanity itself, is being perpetrated at this very minute. The 53 hostages being held are not guilty of any crime. The crime is being committed by terrorists who are kidnaping innocent victims, sponsored by and approved by Government officials themselves. In two votes in the Security Council of the United Nations, unanimous votes, Iran was condemned for this action. And in the International Court of Justice, that decision was confirmed.
We are eager to see this issue resolved, but Iran is the nation which is committing a crime. We have tried to settle this in accordance with international law and peacefully, and we will continue to do so.
But the fact that the terrorists participated in the desecration is an indication of the kind of people they are and a vivid indication of the difficulties that we have experienced in getting what seems to be required—a unanimous decision by terrorists, the top officials, the Revolutionary Council, and the Ayatollah Khomeini-before this crime can be terminated.
Judy [Judy Woodruff, NBC News].
THE PRESIDENT. In November, I think it was November the 20th, we were constantly hearing from the terrorists who held our hostages that they would be immediately tried for war crimes and executed. We spelled out to the public, and therefore to Iran, the extreme adverse consequences to them if such action should be taken, without being overly specific, but letting them know that there would be serious consequences for their nation and their people. We specifically spelled out one step in that process short of military action, and that was the interruption of commerce to Iran.
The mayor of Fort Wayne and others have done a superb job in making all the local officials available in this heavy burden on the community. And the attitude of the people along the highway as I came in from the airport was one of friendship and encouragement, which shows the deep concern of the people about this unfortunate incident and the hope that Vernon Jordan will do well and recover completely, which is a high prospect now, and that the perpetrators of this crime will be brought to justice.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, after I got home, I looked it up in the dictionary— [laughter] —because some question had been raised by the press. It said, "the attempted murder of a prominent person," and this is all I meant. I was not trying to define the nature of the crime except that a prominent person was the subject of an attack.
People are uprooted. Television—that electronic version of the man who came to dinner and never went home—affects families in ways that we are only now beginning to understand. Inflation and recession both put additional burdens on family life. Problems like drugs, alcohol, unwanted pregnancies, even suicide have reached down to members of a family who are younger and younger. Tragic instances of family violence remind us that the bonds of kinship don't automatically make families a place of nurturing one another. Most violent crimes against a person are committed among those who know each other and often love each other.
It's the first place that we learn to care and to nurture the child, and to recognize its centrality in any society. That has always been the special responsibility of the family. It's here that the motivation and the morals and goals of a life are first shaped. Habits that one carries through adulthood are quite often formed at a very early age in the family. In family life we also find the roots of crime and failure, and quite often a lifetime of health problems are started at an early age within the family. They are also the roots of good habits and achievements and happiness and a pattern of whether or not we are concerned about others or just ourselves.
His goal has not just been to see justice done, not just to see criminals punished. His motive has not only been to seek revenge but to remember and to make certain that never again will such a crime against decency and civility and humanity be committed—never.
There are generations today who were born and raised and who are raising their own children now, who know the Holocaust only as history, if they know it at all. What we tell them they will pass on not just to our grandchildren but to the descendants that we will never see. We owe these generations something more than just the legacy of a lawlessness that they will never be able to fathom, a crime that they will never be able to comprehend. They must understand that Nazis were human beings who went awry. They must realize that human beings are capable of unspeakable, unbelievable atrocities. Human beings. But they must also understand that people can only be molded in the image of evil when they have no principles of their own to uphold, that people are moved to violence only when they are not convinced of the strength of peace.
Civil rights is part of all that. The violation of federally protected human rights is a serious crime, no matter who the victim might be, no matter who the violator of the law might be. And as long as I'm President, the United States Government will fully enforce civil rights laws.
The United States of America will never recognize nor negotiate with the PLO as long as it refuses to recognize Israel's right to exist and refuses to accept U.N. Resolution 242. The United States does not deal with organizations which attempt to accomplish their objectives by means of terrorism. Terrorism is a crime against decency and humanity, whether it occurs on the streets of Paris or on the streets of Jerusalem, whether those responsible in Paris are neo-Nazis or in Jerusalem members of the PLO.
MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
MR. HILLIARD. President Carter, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
There is something else about social security—of course, that doesn't come out of the payroll tax; it comes out of the general fund—that something should be done about. I think it's disgraceful that the Disability Insurance Fund in social security finds checks going every month to tens of thousands of people who are locked up in our institutions for crime or for mental illness, and they are receiving disability checks from social security every month while a State institution provides for all of their needs and their care.
MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
MR. HILLIARD. President Carter, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
There is something else about social security — of course, that doesn't come out of the payroll tax; it comes out of the general fund — that something should be done about. I think it's disgraceful that the Disability Insurance Fund in social security finds checks going every month to tens of thousands of people who are locked up in our institutions for crime or for mental illness, and they are receiving disability checks from social security every month while a State institution provides for all of their needs and their care.
Terrorism is a crime against decency and humanity. We condemn it wherever it occurs, either on the streets of Pads or on the streets of Jerusalem, whether those responsible are neo-Nazis or members of the PLO.
Let me say in closing that you live in a city dedicated to tolerance. You're a city that, because of that, has remembered the Holocaust. You've erected a monument to 6 million martyrs. I'm proud to say that under my administration, with the help of Ted Mann, Ed Koch, and others, the United States Government has set into motion the development of a similar national memorial. That's what the Holocaust Commission will do. It will design a suitable memorial to this historic crime, and we will study the constant memory of its victims.
I don't intend to pardon any more people from the Vietnam era. I promised the American people when I was running for office that I would pardon the ones who violated the selective service laws. I don't have any apology to make about it, and think I made the right decision. But the deserters and others who have committed crimes against military law or civilian law will not be pardoned by me on any sort of blanket basis. My preference is to let the Defense Department handle those cases by categories or by individual cases.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you are presupposing guilt before a trial. It's obvious to me that members of the Government, in the military, the CIA and the FBI and the Oval Office, if a crime is committed, need to have that crime investigated. And if they're determined to be guilty, they should be punished. No special excuse should be given for officials in the FBI. I don't know the details of the case. I've not been briefed on it and have no reason to be. I have encouraged Attorney General Griffin Bell, who needs no encouragement, to enforce the law enthusiastically.
Obviously, the number one contributing factor to crime of all kinds, in my opinion, is high unemployment among young people, particularly those who are black or Spanish-speaking or in a minority age or group where they have such a difficult time getting jobs in times of economic problems.
I wish that everyone here could go to the South Bronx area of New York where I visited earlier this week and see the devastation there. It's absolutely heartbreaking, and I realize after campaigning throughout this country that this is not a unique area. There are other urban areas like this where crime is rampant, where living conditions that we all take for granted are completely absent, where deterioration diminishes hope, and where there's an ingrained distrust of the concern and the ability of government to meet legitimate needs.
Using that as a yardstick, you could say that with the national population of over 180 million, we could realize about $108 million. The end result would be a healthier nation, due to more money or less crime—either way the Nation wins. As I see it, the only opposition to this type of program would be the chronic offenders. What's your comment?
So, bringing some quality into the entire judicial system and crime control is a very great commitment of my own administration.
We were pleased last year to see the overall crime rate drop for the first time in many years. It dropped 4 percent. Perhaps this is an omen of things to come.
One of the reasons that the crime rate did drop, in my opinion, is the much tighter control over the habit-forming drugs that were coming into our country. Under the leadership of Dr. Peter Bourne, who heads up my drug abuse program in the White House, we worked out an agreement with the new President of Mexico, Lopez Portillo, to hold down the production and the distribution in our country of heroin derived from poppies that were being grown in the mountain areas of Mexico. Lopez Portillo is committed to controlling this source of crime in our country as much as I am. So, we worked out with him a means to cut down the opium smuggling into the United States from Mexico by 90 percent. It means now that the opium sold on our city streets is much less pure. It's much more expensive, and just that fact alone has helped to cut down many of the violent crimes.
So, your recommendation that we use money from the court system itself to finance a better criminal justice system is a very good idea. But I would like for you to give your name and address over here so that we can give you a complete analysis of what I hope to do to cut down crime in our country and to make our criminal court system, our entire bar association more responsive to the needs of our people.
Thank you very much.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
There are many other areas of domestic policy--housing, health, crime, education, agriculture, and others--that will concern me as President but which I do not have time to discuss tonight.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you are presupposing guilt before a trial. It's obvious to me that members of the Government, in the military, the CIA and the FBI and the Oval Office, if a crime is committed, need to have that crime investigated. And if they're determined to be guilty, they should be punished. No special excuse should be given for officials in the FBI. I don't know the details of the case. I've not been briefed on it and have no reason to be. I have encouraged Attorney General Griffin Bell, who needs no encouragement, to enforce the law enthusiastically.
This will make it very difficult for high Government officials to have interests which conflict with those of the public. And we should insist on the same high standards for private institutions. That's why I proposed to Congress making foreign bribery by American companies and officials a crime.
There's also a need for us to recognize that you don't have to have scarce and exotic drugs like heroin before somebody can be damaged, because barbiturates, for instance, are by far the major cause of death among all drugs, and they are prescribed sometimes. Sometimes they are not even controlled by prescription. So, a comprehensive analysis of the entire drug field, including both alcohol and the addictive and non-addictive drugs, plus a treatment of those who are damaged by the drugs, will be a part of our prevention program, our crime control problem, our community treatment program, and also our comprehensive health program.
Obviously, the number one contributing factor to crime of all kinds, in my opinion, is high unemployment among young people, particularly those who are black or Spanish-speaking or in a minority age or group where they have such a difficult time getting jobs in times of economic problems.
I'm from the Sun Belt States. I think there's been too much of a channeling of Federal moneys into Sun Belt areas. I think between the downtown ghetto areas on crime control, housing development, and so forth, the funds have quite often been channeled off into the suburbs because of more highly educated people, better organized people, more able to speak loudly and who understood the complexities of Federal programs. We're trying to change that and focus the attention of the Government, whatever it is, on the downtown, urban, deteriorating neighborhoods.
And on crime, I think the major cause of crime in those downtown areas is unemployment, and we're trying to focus on this question. We've got now about 1.1 million jobs allotted during the summertime for young people, much more than ever has been before.
Obviously, we've got a long way to go in law enforcement. I think, to a substantial degree, the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration funds have been wasted in years gone by. We are trying to bring a more narrow focusing on them to prevent crime and to get out of the waste of buying very expensive and fancy machines and so forth and actually concentrate in the areas where the crime rate is highest.
I think I've seen statistics lately from the FBI and others that show that there's a general reduction in the crime rate. I think there's a better tone in the country, a little bit more trust in the Government. This was certainly subverted by the evidence in New York earlier this month. But I think, in general, throughout the country there's more of a respect being built up for public officials--not because of anything I've done, but just because we've recovered partially from the embarrassment of Watergate and the CIA and the Vietnam war and so forth.
Human degradation, oppression and deprivation, as rationalized and perpetuated in southern Africa by the racist regimes there, is a crime against which not only Africa but all mankind as a whole must fight.
I was living in Atlanta as Governor, and Detroit was known as the murder capital of the Nation. In the last 2 years alone, with the good work of your mayor and with close cooperation from officials in the suburban areas, the State government, and particularly the police, the murder rate has been reduced 64 percent. And the crime rate in Detroit in the last year has dropped 21 percent--the greatest reduction in crime of any major city in the whole country.
One of the major contributing factors to the dramatic reduction in crime that does permit the children to walk to school and does permit people to go out on the front porch at night without being fearful is the close relationship between people who live in a neighborhood and the police officers who serve there.
I rode in from the airport today with the mayor of Detroit, Coleman Young, and I asked him, "How in the world have you and the police officers had such an unprecedented reduction in the crime rate?" And he said that one of the major reasons is that the police officers now are closely related to the community in which they serve. And they become friends of the people who live there, and eventually that friendship is reciprocated.
Quite often in a community that is very poor, that is going downhill, the people distrust the police officers and look on them almost as enemies instead of friends. I think that that permanent, friendly, mutually supportive relationship with the police officials among the neighbors who live in that community is a very vital part that can prevent a deterioration. Obviously, our public works programs, the community development programs, the housing programs, the red-lining programs, the crime control programs will be of help.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
In my speech in Los Angeles, I pointed out for instance in Czechoslovakia that recently there have been four people tried there as dissidents. Their only crime was that they dissented from what government action has been taken.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, almost every item that's in the domestic budget is directly helpful to the major cities. We proposed hundreds of millions of dollars for basic education, for training programs, for public service jobs, for transportation, for housing, for crime control.
And to marshal the thousands of Americans who want to contribute their time and energy to the betterment of their own neighborhoods, I'm proposing neighborhood rehabilitation and anticrime projects and a new Urban Volunteer Corps.
Obviously there are some instances in the military and otherwise when a heinous crime, when committed by someone under orders, should be punished. But I think in this case the Attorney General made the right decision.
We're providing direct payments to neighborhood groups and organizations, like those here in Watts, for community crime control, to repair housing, and for neighborhood development.
I know in Georgia, for instance, the distributive education students have taken on a special project of exposing and helping to control shoplifting, a very strong contribution to controlling crime in our country. There might be equivalent opportunities in all the States of our Nation.
I don't intend to pardon any more people from the Vietnam era. I promised the American people when I was running for office that I would pardon the ones who violated the selective service laws. I don't have any apology to make about it, and think I made the right decision. But the deserters and others who have committed crimes against military law or civilian law will not be pardoned by me on any sort of blanket basis. My preference is to let the Defense Department handle those cases by categories or by individual cases.
Our starting point in ensuring justice is to reduce crime through measures that are effective and fair.
There was encouraging progress in this direction last year, when the volume of crime fell for the first time in many years by 4 percent below the previous year's level. It's a welcome development, but it does not change the urgent need to control crime. States and local governments must take the lead in this effort, but the Federal Government must do its part.
We are working with congressional leaders to reorganize the Law Enforcement Assistance Agency, to gear our funding system to our most pressing needs, to provide better support for State and local governments, and to concentrate our help on improving the criminal justice system and reducing crime. I'll propose a consolidation and a reorganization of many of the functions now performed by more than 110 different Federal agencies that have direct responsibility for law enforcement.
We can reduce the tremendous overload on our criminal justice system by removing such crimes as drunkenness and vagrancy from the courts, thereby freeing' the courts to deal with serious offenses and enabling us to treat these social illnesses in ways that offer a greater hope of success than conviction and incarceration.
I'm supporting uniform sentencing standards for Federal offenses, which will make the punishment for crimes more rational and fair and will help ensure that the rich and the poor are treated alike, no matter what court might convict them.
Powerful white-collar criminals cheat consumers of millions of dollars; public officials who abuse their high rank damage the integrity of our Nation in profound and longlasting ways. But too often, these bigshot crooks escape the full consequences of their acts. Justice must be blind to rank, power, and position. The Justice Department is now undertaking a major new effort on white-collar crime.
We must remove the economic barriers to justice. When a poor family is cheated by a merchant, unfairly threatened with eviction, falsely accused of a crime, it can very rarely take advantage of the skilled legal talent at reasonable rates.
THE PRESIDENT. This has been one of the most exciting and gratifying experiences that I've had since I've been President. The cooperation there has been superb, and there has been a drastic reduction in the trafficking of drugs across the border. Also, we've helped each other by having a much more effective control of smuggling and other violation of border law and customs. This permits a great enhancement of mutual trust, also helps to control crime and, at the same time, promotes the benefits of legitimate trade and commerce. So, I'm very pleased.
For those who enter legally, things are not easy, but they at least have all the protections of everyone else who live in this country. The undocumented workers, however, sometimes living in fear, exploited by those who mistreat them and take advantage of the most vulnerable among us, exist outside our legal system. They are hunted not for crimes—because they've committed no crimes—but because they are here without permission. They are people who seek only a better life for their children and a better opportunity for themselves. This is exactly what my own ancestors sought when they first came to this country.
Civil rights is part of all that. The violation of federally protected human rights is a serious crime, no matter who the victim might be, no matter who the violator of the law might be. And as long as I'm President, the United States Government will fully enforce civil rights laws.
I don't intend to pardon any more people from the Vietnam era. I promised the American people when I was running for office that I would pardon the ones who violated the selective service laws. I don't have any apology to make about it, and think I made the right decision. But the deserters and others who have committed crimes against military law or civilian law will not be pardoned by me on any sort of blanket basis. My preference is to let the Defense Department handle those cases by categories or by individual cases.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the only comment that I am free to make under our own system of government is that I hope that justice will prevail; that the ones who are accused of a crime will be given a fair trial; if they are found guilty, that they will be punished in accordance with normal procedures for an equivalent crime committed.
I wish that everyone here could go to the South Bronx area of New York where I visited earlier this week and see the devastation there. It's absolutely heartbreaking, and I realize after campaigning throughout this country that this is not a unique area. There are other urban areas like this where crime is rampant, where living conditions that we all take for granted are completely absent, where deterioration diminishes hope, and where there's an ingrained distrust of the concern and the ability of government to meet legitimate needs.
In my speech in Los Angeles, I pointed out for instance in Czechoslovakia that recently there have been four people tried there as dissidents. Their only crime was that they dissented from what government action has been taken.
Obviously there are some instances in the military and otherwise when a heinous crime, when committed by someone under orders, should be punished. But I think in this case the Attorney General made the right decision.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
Of course, Democrats have always believed in service, but carefully budgeted, efficiently delivered service. We can cut crime, we can build roads, we can deliver jobs, we can feed our people without huge deficits if we eliminate the waste and the bloat in government. This is responsible leadership. This is sound fiscal policy, and the American people know it.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the crime rate goes up and down. For a while, since I've been in office, it's gone downward, and lately, in some cities at least, it's gone upward. We have tried to work more closely with the local and State officials. The primary responsibility for the enforcement of the law in a given community lies with local officials, first of all, State officials secondly, and with the Federal Government coming in to participate in some types of crime which involve interstate violations of the commerce laws or the violation of basic civil rights.
So, the effort to prevent white-collar crimes, to enforce the antitrust laws and others, I think, have been very successful. We've prosecuted and concluded longstanding cases involving illicit surveillance of citizens and other sensitive matters that were left over from previous administrations adequately. So, I think that's the best analysis I can give you.
We still have a serious problem with crime. One of the factors that's impossible to assess is how much a better reporting system affects the number of crimes reported. My guess is that there's a much more efficient way now to have an accurate count of the number of crimes committed. I say none of this with apology for the excessively high crime rate, but we're doing the best we can under difficult circumstances.
