So, I think that we are moving now in the Labor Department to put together a special program for Vietnam veterans. The Congress has recently decided to extend GI Bill of Rights benefits for the full 10 years, which will help a lot of those who would have lost their education opportunities from losing those opportunities. Also, for the first time in my lifetime we've got quite a young man, who's familiar with the recent war, in charge of the entire Veterans Administration itself. I appointed Max Cleland, who happens to be a triple amputee and who's a very tough, young administrator, to be in charge of the Veterans Administration.
There is a strong trend in our country now toward more career or vocational training and away from a college education.
Ultimately, in a person's life I don't think it makes that much difference. This is a choice that each person has to make. And I know that the most important consideration is that when you finish a training program as a licensed practical nurse or a stenographer or an automobile mechanic or a bricklayer or when you get a Ph.D. in physics or philosophy, the major thing is to have a way to be employed when your education is over and to use your only life that God gives you here on Earth to a useful and productive way.
So, as a young person yourself, I hope that you will continue your education. And I hope that by the time you graduate we will have done something about the unemployment rate so that you can get a job without any problem.
THE PRESIDENT. Thank you very much.One thing I would like to remind all of you on is this: When you ask a question, for instance, about the problems of small business, I know that you probably know more about the subject than I do, particularly the one that asked the question that has a problem. And we would like very much, as a follow-up, if you have specific ideas on how we might have a better health program, or better education for young people, or better training programs for those who are unemployed, or a better welfare system, or better help for small business, that you write me a letter and put Clinton, Massachusetts, in a big circle on the front of the letter, and I'll tell my staff to bring those letters directly to me.
And I want the American people, after 3 or 4 years at least, not to look on the Federal Government as an enemy, or an obstacle to be overcome, but as a friend that's constantly probing for better ways to let your own life be meaningful. And if you have a problem of unemployment or too much inflation, or not enough education, or not enough 'health care, or inadequate roads or the threat of death from nuclear weapons, I hope that in the future you will say that "my elected officials in Washington or in Boston will help me work out of this problem."
Although it's never going to be an exact science, I think we've got to go a long way in higher education institutions and also in the Government, particularly the Department of Labor and so forth, Department of HEW, in trying to match in a predictable way the jobs that are going to be available, and that graduates are going to be coming out of our colleges, so the jobs will be there when you get ready to graduate. It's not an exact science, obviously, but I think we'll be better off in the future than we have been in the past.Good luck to you, by the way.
I think it's accurate to say that Secretary of HEW Califano agrees with me completely. And we are trying to make it possible for the people of this Nation to understand how to prevent unwanted pregnancies with education programs and with the availability of contraceptives and other devices, when they believe in their use, as an alternative to abortion. But I don't believe that either States or the Federal Government should be required to finance abortions.
I think there's a historical trend that is almost inevitable that I detect and have to recognize; and that is, that we're shifting more and more toward having economic growth based on a higher quality of life, which means an increasing foundation of things like better health care, better education, more recreation, and not the long, tedious hours of labor that went into the production of goods.
But the long-range problem is to restore confidence of citizens who live in a community in the structure of government, police officers, the housing opportunities, good jobs, and this obviously was not the case in New York. So, I think that this is an additional indication of the need to channel government programs for housing, health, education, job opportunities in the deteriorating urban areas that have been neglected too long.
If the purpose of the Government-and I think its legitimate purpose--is to prevent the birth of unwanted children, I think the best way to spend limited Federal moneys, again, is in the education of sometimes ignorant young people, women and men, and making available to them family planning instruction plus contraceptive devices that would prevent a pregnancy to begin with.
A lot of young people serve in the Army who are minority members of our communities. I appointed the first black Secretary of the Army. The head of all education programs in the Nation happens to be a black woman.
THE PRESIDENT. I have had a discussion with both the Secretary of HEW, Mr. Califano, and the Attorney General about this case. And I think that we will prevent a reversion to the previous discrimination that did exist; at the same time, we want to respect the need for an adequate level of education for minority groups in our country, and we also want to preserve the heritage and background and history that is part of the lives of minority families.
So, with a good education program, with a firm stand not to encourage abortions as a normal way of life, and with the provision to poor people of government supported contraceptive devices if the person believes in their use, these are the alternatives that I personally favor in preference to abortions.
On the bilingual approach to many problems, not just in education--of course, this is something we are pursuing. I promised this during the campaign and will continue with it.
THE PRESIDENT. That's a good and a tough question to answer. And, Courtney, I can't tell you that I've got the answer. We have, in the whole country, now brought the unemployment rate down, I'd say, about 1 percent below what it was a year ago. And as you've already heard, in Detroit itself in the last 2 or 3 years, the unemployment rate has dropped about 75 percent. But that still means that when you have a 6 or 7 percent unemployment rate nationwide among young men like you, who are black, who have a fairly good education even, the unemployment rate runs 35 or 40 percent, which is entirely too high.
But if the Government has programs that help with unemployment, that help with the education of low-income children and housing, and if Government programs give some emphasis on the development of the neighborhoods, which are where people live, and consult with the people who live in neighborhoods, and if, perhaps, you could appoint a Presidential commission on urban neighborhoods to make sure you're not just dealing with city hall, but to make sure that programs are relating to neighborhoods, that would help all of us. Thank you.
When I was Governor, I was chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission. There are 13 States that belong to it, as you know. And this is an area that has been devastated in the past, was perhaps the poorest region of our Nation, may still be the poorest region of our Nation, geographically speaking. This poverty, as you point out so well, has forced many, several million people, from that mountain region into the urban centers. Quite often, they don't have the technical skills or the educational background or experience to survive and help themselves once they get in an urban environment. I think that this is likely to improve.
Secondly, we have still very pressing educational problems. Even though we are making some progress in education here, we still have 40,000 young people in Detroit between the ages of 16 and 20 that are dropouts from the school system. And our regular programs don't take care of them. No State programs are dealing with these young dropouts. So, we need new alternative education programs that give us a chance to recapture these young people and provide a new quality of life for them, because they will have the educational base they need.
MRS. PRIETO. Mr. President, I am Luz Maria Prieto of Chicago, Illinois. I work for a group called Mujeres Latinas en Accion, or Latin Women in Action. We're a group of Latino women in Chicago. And knowing that--we know the problems of the barrios and the problems of the women. We have to struggle just to survive. And the woman has the greatest burden to survive for her family. We have to struggle through a disastrous educational system, a health system that we don't understand and sometimes does us a great deal of harm, and a great deal of underemployment because we are working women and have to work just to keep our families afloat. We're away from all the debates of things that affect us--domestic violence, abortion, drug abuse.
The sad part is not that we not only have no voice in these debates, but these are all debates about reactions to the problems. The women in the neighborhoods don't want just to react. We want to control our own destinies. And we need very simple answers, it seems to us, if we could say something about it. We need quality education, all the way down from child care, all around the clock, that's bilingual and bicultural, education for our children, education for the women who have to go back so we'd have real skills, skills that would benefit us and our families and would build up our communities, not just being dumped from one public sector job to another.
Other than that, education, you know--we have dropouts. It's many a reasons for these dropouts. We never had a committee to go out and find out why these dropouts are out of high school. We need people that's in the community to get into these programs.
I guess what I'm saying is that there are hopes and plans and even some successes on alternative energy sources, particularly for people on fixed income, because I'm sure we're not going to be able to get supplemental appropriations every year for this type of problem. So, we must work on the alternative sources and on education, on the real issues surrounding energy.
The question I want to ask you, President, is that, what is the reason why, when programs are funded for Latinos, Chicanos, or Hispanic communities--and they are just getting off the ground--they seem to be taken away from us, including the city of Detroit? What I want to ask you, President Carter, is, for example--at the present time there is a need for this type of education, of programs, not only in the black community but in the Latino communities. For example, at the present time. President Carter and Ms. Olivarez, LULAC National Education Service Centers has only a chance to be funded until December. This is the one and only top educational center mechanism that the Latino community has all over the United States. They only have fundings up to December. I am concerned, because it deals with all the issues that Mrs. Prieto and Mrs. Molina have addressed in the Latino community. I am concerned, just like all my brothers here in southwest Detroit. I am also a product of Michigan. I am concerned with what will you, President Carter, do in alleviating our problem when our funding for our Latinos programs, for Hispanic communities, are detailed, are not funded to the capacity that is needed. We need an answer on that, Mr. President.
Ms. OLIVAREZ. Mr. President, that particular project is an educational project that isn't designed exclusively for poor people. They have been funded by our agency for--it will be 4 1/2 years in January. And we have asked them to go to the Office of Education for that kind of money, because we don't have enough money to fund educational centers. Sometimes I think we wind up subsidizing the other agencies that have larger budgets.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
The second thing we are doing is to. make sure in all our programs that deal with disabilities that we are emphasizing not institutional care, but community oriented small units, where the children can be close to their families, close to their own homes, where the cost is much less and the benefit of training programs and education programs are greatly magnified.
Last quarter, about $3 billion of that program was in effect. By the end of this quarter, $18 billion will be in effect and, in the first quarter of next year, the full amount. We believe that this will have a beneficial impact on unemployment rates, but it certainly won't solve the problem. We will by next June, for instance, have 725,000 jobs under the comprehensive education and training program. This is the highest level for jobs of this category supported directly by the Federal Government since the New Deal days under Roosevelt.
MR. MACNEIL. Mr. President, when you were still running for office, you told me in an interview--when I asked you, perhaps embarrassingly, what your weakness was, you said perhaps a difficulty to compromise. It had been difficult with the Georgia Legislature, and it might be a difficulty with the Congress. Has this year in Washington been an education in compromise?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, yes. I'm not sure if I had an 'adequate education yet, because I still find it difficult to compromise. But I'm learning. One way that I have learned since I've been here to avoid having to compromise so much is by involving the congressional leaders in the decision in the initial stages. When we evolved the reorganization bill and when we put together the Energy Department, when we evolved the social security bill and other measures that were controversial, we consulted very closely with congressional leaders ahead of time. So I'm trying to avoid having to yield to my weakness, which is a difficulty in compromising. I'm learning every day, I think.
THE PRESIDENT. As you know, before I was President I was Governor of Georgia for 4 years, and my wife, Rosalynn, and I both undertook the mental health program in our State as a major new task. We were successful then in putting into effect a strong preventive care program, and an attempt, through diet and through education in the prenatal months of a mother's life and also in the early stages of a child's life, to prevent future mental illnesses.
This past year we initiated a strong economic stimulus package, and I think our economy was helped greatly. I just pointed out a few minutes ago that the unemployment rate in New England, which had been 8 1/2 percent when I took office, dropped to 5 1/2 percent in 1 year. I can't predict that that downward rate is going to continue. I don't know about the future. But we will have going to the Congress next week from me a recommendation for a $13 billion continuation of the comprehensive education and training act, because the Democrats have always felt that people who don't have great wealth ought to have an opportunity for vocational training and education tied directly to a job. We've advocated more than doubling public service employment and greatly expanding jobs for young people. And I think you know that the civil rights acts were initiated and passed by a Democratic President working with a Democratic Congress.
THE PRESIDENT. There is already a bill in the government organization committee under Senator Ribicoff, to set up a separate department of education. When I first went into government, I was on a local school board. I ran for the Georgia Senate, and I was the chairman of the university committee and in the education committee.
When I was Governor, I would say I spent 25 percent of my time, at least, working on improvements in education.
I doubt that I've spent a half of 1 percent of my time dealing with educational matters as President. Education is buried deep within the same department as health and welfare, which are the more dominant matters of interest, at least in Washington. And I believe that in that process, education is neglected.
There's a tremendous opportunity in our country to get back to basic education. We've got too many people, I think, going into the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grades that can't even read and write. And we've got too many vocational and technical schools, career training programs, high schools, even colleges turning out students that are not accurately matched in their learning capabilities with the jobs that are available when they graduate.
There's very little correlation between jobs that need to be filled and the product of our. educational institutions.
I think that this is also a matter that ties very closely to employment, in the comprehensive education and training programs, you know, working with both private employers and also with the State and local governments as well as the Federal Government, where you can have a combination of training and education. I've .just advocated recently a tremendous increase in scholarships and loans, grants and work-study programs for college students.
The Federal Government is just now getting involved in that process. We also have a real need to tie together the training and education programs for the mentally afflicted Americans, or those who are slow learners, and in many ways I think the Federal Government ought to give more attention to education.
I think the control of the education system ought to be at the State and local government. I don't want to get the Federal Government into controlling of any colleges or high schools or grammar schools or kindergartens. But I just would like to have as President a much more sure sense that I'm devoting an adequate amount of my own time to bringing about a raising of educational standards in our country.
We spend too much money and get too little education benefits back from it, and I think a separate education department or agency with that one single responsibility would give education the high visibility on a national level and the voice of the President promoting better education, that I don't think will ever be possible with education buried in Health, Education, and Welfare.
THE PRESIDENT. For college education?
One of the things that has endangered the entire college aid program has been the deliberate cheating by college students off the taxpayers when they signed a contract, "If you will lend me money to get my college education, I will repay it and let that money go to help another student." And because of a loophole in the law, many students would finish college and immediately declare bankruptcy so they would not have to repay the loan I don't have any sympathy for a student who does that on purpose. And I think we ought to do everything we can to collect those loans when they've been made in good faith and received in good faith, because the ones who suffer are the taxpayers in general and also other students who could benefit if that first student did his or her duty.
I think most of the groups that represent handicapped people agree that this is true. It applies not only to jobs and to educational opportunities, to special education grants and loans that are available but it also applies to physical facilities, the design of buildings, the design of buses and other transportation available.
I might say that there are things that can be done to prevent an unwanted birth—an education program, the availability of contraceptives for those who believe in their use, family planning programs, more easy adoptions, and so forth. And we are moving on those areas, too.
I'd like to spend the brief time I have with you answering questions that you might have to present to me, but I would like to say that we are grateful for your coming. You represent an element of leadership, both present and future, that's very valuable to our country. And I know that your interest in both higher education and government is exemplified by your presence here.
I don't see the two to be interrelated at all. I believe that to provide government funding for abortion is, in effect, a means of encouraging abortion as one extension of contraceptive procedures. I think a good education program, the making available of contraceptive devices for those who believe in their use, and encouragement of the facility with which unwanted children perhaps can be adopted, is a much better alternative.
We've greatly increased funding for social services, for health, for housing, and for education, and we are today working to pass comprehensive health insurance, another long overdue aid to families. I also hope to implement major improvements in our policies and programs concerning foster care and adoption. Such programs, if poorly administered, have often hurt rather than helped children and families.
When I was in State politics, my main interest was in education. When I was elected to the State Senate, I had one request when I got to Atlanta. That was to be put on the education committee. I was on a local school board for 7 years before I went to the State Senate. And when I became Governor, I spent about 25 percent of my time trying to make sure that education for our students was improved.
Since I've been President, that has not been the case. Education in Washington gets lost. I doubt that 2 percent of the people in this room could tell me who is specifically responsible for better education from the Federal point of view.
So, I believe that a separate department that can focus not on social programs, not on arguments and so forth and lawsuits, but on better classroom education is a very important step forward.
The second thing is this: We wrote into the law a requirement that the bureaucracy be reduced. The law says that we've got to have 500 fewer employees in the new department of education than we have now. With increased efficiency, we can do that. The law also requires that no increase in personnel in the new department can be approved unless the President, the Office of Management and Budget, and also the Congress specifically votes to increase personnel. So, we've tried to build in there a protection against increased bureaucracy.
So, I'm proud of the new law, as you can well see, and I believe it's going to be better for education all over the country.
Thank you, sir.
There are requirements under the law, as you know, against any sort of discrimination or preventing students from getting the same quality of education within a given city or within a given school district. That's got to be honored.
I don't have any authority over it, as you know, as President. But I believe that everyone wants to work it out so that there can be a satisfactory solution for black parents, for those who speak Spanish or other languages, for those who have strong ethnic commitments, and for those who want to preserve neighborhoods, those who want higher quality education.
So, what happens in the future will be very closely observed by me, and I'll do the best I can to reach the ultimate goal of honoring people's rights and having better education. But don't consider it to be a catastrophe if the case is moved into court. I think there it can be considered very calmly, very carefully, and I believe that ultimately the solution will be satisfactory to you.
I decided—before I became President, as a matter of fact, but after long experience in education and financing—that the best approach was the one that we've taken. We've increased the Federal contribution to education, in the first 2 years I was in office, by 60 percent above what it had been in the past. We implemented last year, 1978, a $12 billion* increase in aid to make sure that every family in this country, even one like your own, would have an opportunity to put their children through college, if the students are academically qualified and do their work.
I believe that if you have a thorough knowledge of what we do offer that there won't be any reason for all four of your children or the ones that you might have in the future—I don't know how many that would be—[not] to go to college and get a good education.
Good luck in the future and also now.
When we read the local newspapers or see the evening television or listen to the radio, what we get at that moment of that day is a picture, most often an accurate picture, of the problems of our society. The inconveniences are multiplied in their importance, and the debates that take place on controversial issues, like taxes or housing or interest rates or inflation or legislation concerning education—we see and we think about the difficulties and the arguments and the temporary failures.
We're a nation of freedom. Our people can stand on our own feet, make our own decisions, be different, be individuals, be innovative, be hard-working, be lazy if we want to, get a good education, choose our own jobs, choose a place to live, choose our own officials, criticize the government, make comments, make suggestions, influence our neighbors. We have a country that lets each person take whatever talent we have and express that talent and let that talent grow to a maximum degree.
Equal rights is more than just equality of pay; it's an opportunity to receive an equal education, equal training, equal job opportunities, equal treatment under the law, equal access to the kind of realization of the use of talent which God has given us all, and a sense among men and women that the time for official, legally condoned discrimination has been eliminated in our country. This kind of continued discrimination is a source of embarrassment and a legitimate source of shame for those who are responsible for the Nation's affairs. It's almost unbelievable that the ERA has not yet been ratified.
There are some long-range sociological facts that we must recognize. In the future we will need women leaders, women employees, in a more rapidly changing, highly technological society. It's not only fair, but it's essential. As a matter of fact, fewer and fewer men in the next few years will be entering the labor force. By 1995, based on presently known birth rate projections, the number of males from 15 to 29 years old will have dropped from 30 million now down to 25 million. To find workers, industry will be forced to turn to women, and we simply must break down the present barriers that prevent women, on an equal basis, from getting the training and the education and the employment opportunities that they deserve.
But in some States the laws are pitifully antiquated, inadequate, inequitable, and unprofitable for the people who live in those particular States. A woman's rights in connection with property, employment, education, the law, government benefits can vary depending on what State she happens to live in.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think there's a normal human trait that arouses legitimate ambition, to analyze your own talent or ability or opportunity and to make the most of one's life, whether it's in the field of journalism or education or science or medicine or politics. Also there is a confluence of events or circumstances sometimes that makes it possible for a southerner—a person from Georgia, a southerner-to have a chance to be elected, to heal the Nation's wounds following the civil rights transition, a Democrat to be coming into the White House following the embarrassment of Watergate and the trauma of Vietnam, the CIA revelations-that was what let it be possible for me to serve as President.
We've got a remarkably united Democratic Party now and programs concerning better health for our Nation, better education for our people, more security for the aged, better job opportunities for all Americans and particularly for young people; the correlation of different agencies, Labor plus Education, to match training with job opportunities, the enhancement of civil or human rights that are now still in a transient stage. We're approaching the culmination of securing, once and for all, equality of opportunity for all our people, including not just minority groups but women. This is important to me.
Pete Rose and others are heroes in this State. I come from Georgia. If you ask almost anyone in Georgia, "Who is the greatest football player who ever played in this country?" they would say Charlie Trippi. As a matter of fact, he played at the University of Georgia when I was in college. Unfortunately, I was at Georgia Tech. They wiped us out, with his help. And I remember that he went to World War II, interrupted his college education, came back later, continued his college career, went to the Sugar Bowl, helped win a victory, threw a 67-yard pass, which I think is still the Sugar Bowl record.
The last thing is that you talk about productivity—how much can a worker produce in a day or a week? The most productive workers on Earth—where do you think they live? The United States, right? So no matter how you measure it—education, minerals, agriculture, type of government, freedom, morality, human rights, equality, new ideas, it belongs to us. And that, all put together, is what really determines the long-range value of the American dollar. It's strong now. It's the favorite currency on Earth, and my belief is, it will stay that way.
I would hate for those hostage families ever to believe that we didn't love them and care for them. Recently, I have signed a bill, this week I've signed a bill that the Congress passed, excluding those hostages from having to pay income taxes and giving them other special privileges for their families and, when they return, educational benefits for their children. So, I think the more we do the better off the hostage families are, and that word leaks back to the hostages, I feel sure.
What I have tried to do is to discourage the need for abortions by improving services to unmarried pregnant women, by improving adoption services, and by encouraging family planning programs, by education of the American public with my own public statements.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there have always been, in politics, and in labor, and in all the professions, including law or education, a few people who violate their standards of morality and decency and even violate the law. I think that since the Watergate crisis, there has been a renewed and intense, investigatory attitude in the press and a very high standard of political ethics required by the American people to be sure that we don't repeat the embarrassment of Watergate.
Secondly, we've tried to increase the allocation of Federal funds for education, particularly to those students who live in poor communities or who need special help, and we've done it with a philosophy that I have of not letting the Federal Government interfere in the operation of the schools, either public or private. I think the operation of the schools, the curriculum, the hiring of teachers, and so forth ought to be strictly local and State officials, not the Federal Government.
We have kept about a million summer youth jobs in this country ever since I've been in office. In addition to that, we have had, I think, a very good career emphasis on young people that want to go into the military. I spent 11 years in the Navy. Senator Glenn was also in the military for a long time. And I would like to encourage young people who want to go through a transition phase and have a fine career either as President of the United States or a U.S. Senator or whatever they want to do, to spend a couple years maybe in the American military, in the volunteer forces. It's a very wonderful way to see the world, to perform a patriotic duty, to get a good education, to get a good career planning. And that's the kind of opportunity that our Government would welcome and would be very helpful.
THE PRESIDENT. We've had a more than 200-percent increase since I've been in office in special education, education for the disadvantaged children of all ages. Also, we've had a very difficult challenge in changing the basic law of our land for the handicapped people. Now we've made great strides. We've implemented the handicapped act, that was passed before I became President, and there's a much more clear commitment of the Government to provide special care for handicapped people of all kinds.
We had a White House conference on the handicapped. You may or may not know about it, but I attended that conference and worked on it. When I first became President, I appointed my wife as the Honorary Chairman of a special commission on mental health. She worked for 2 years. And late in 1978, early in 1979, we made a proposal to the Congress encompassing the recommendations of her mental health commission to the Congress. Recently, with Senator Kennedy's help, Senator Glenn's, and others, we passed the Mental Health Systems Act of 1980. It is landmark legislation that will provide increased funding, increased educational opportunities for young people who are emotionally disturbed, who are mentally retarded, or who have some other mental illness.
But I think this kind of article, in a paper that supports Mr. Reagan, shows what we might expect if he should go in office. And there are a lot of other things in here like that, too—that they would cut off Federal funding for any city, for instance, that had rent control and not permit any more housing funds coming in, and would let States do away with food stamps if they want to, and let States have their own kind of welfare programs and not let the Federal Government support them. And another thing that I know you all are concerned about—property taxes—Governor Reagan has also proposed that the cost of education, for instance, and the cost of welfare, be put on the States and local governments.
THE PRESIDENT. We have given, as you know, an increasing amount of aid to parochial schools, and we'll continue to do that. We've worked especially strongly on going along with the guarantee that every young child who finishes high school, regardless of how poor the family might be, to be guaranteed of a college education, either for direct grants, or Government-guaranteed loans, for work-study programs, and sometimes for scholarships. The only thing that I've disagreed with is the tax credit. But I believe that we will go ahead and continue to increase the allotment of Federal funds for the parochial and for the public schools.
THE PRESIDENT. There may have been some proposal that an individual person made that we couldn't finance. But since I've been in office, in just 3 1/2 years, we've increased Federal expenditures for education by 73 percent in that short period of time. And as I said earlier, there is no reason, now, for any student in this country who's able to do college work not to go to college, no matter how poor the family might be. If you know of any student like that, you let me know and I can guarantee you that that student can either get a loan or a scholarship or a grant or a work-study program, so they can go through college. That's one thing that we have done successfully since I've been in office—a lot of other things, too. [Laughter]
I understand that unemployment and inflation are very real, and have done great harm to many American families. Nothing makes it harder to provide decent health, housing, and education for our people, protect our environment, or to realize our goal of a balanced budget, than a stagnant economy.
There are many other areas of domestic policy--housing, health, crime, education, agriculture, and others--that will concern me as President but which I do not have time to discuss tonight.
Our own science and technology can be useful to many of your countries. For instance, we are ready to train your technicians to use more information gathered by our own satellites, so that you can make better judgments on management of your resources and your environment. Space communications technology can also be a creative tool in helping your national television systems to promote your educational and cultural objectives.
These intellectual, social, cultural, and educational exchanges will continue, either with or without government help. But there are steps that governments can take to speed up and enhance this process. In the months ahead, therefore, we plan to explore with your governments--individually and here in the OAS--new people-to-people programs, an increase in professional and scientific exchanges, and other ways of strengthening the ties that already link us.
I don't know that Senator McGovern's speech to the ADA was mirrored in the objections by any other Democrats. Obviously, we have a firm belief in the character of the Democratic Party, that we're the ones who are responsible more than any other party in this country's existence for the provision of jobs for our people, a better life for those who are afflicted, who are poor, who are disadvantaged, who need education and need security in their old age. These kinds of programs have been put forward by me to the Congress in a very strong and continuing way.
The domestic problems which we do face as Americans are difficult, indeed, but we have the courage and the ingenuity and the greatness of spirit to meet these challenges. I believe that we can build an America in which our day-to-day practices live up to our democratic ideals, in which the family life, mine and yours, is strong and stable, in which the neighborhoods of our cities are vital and safe, in which work is available and is justly rewarded, in which opportunity is not limited by color or sex or religion or economic or educational background, in which there is schooling and employment for the young and dignity and security for the old.
However, it's interesting to point out, at the recent London summit conference, the single issue of most concern to the seven heads of state assembled there was unemployment among young people. In the ideological struggle with the Eastern Socialist and Communist countries, this is our one major vulnerability. We have got to provide in our country an economic system that's healthy enough and an education system that's competent enough so that when our young people reach the age of 18 or 19 years old, they can find a way to use the talent and ability and opportunities that God gave them and not enter adult life discouraged and excluded from society. This ought to be number one in all our efforts in the future.
And finally, I'm committed to the phasing-in of a workable national health insurance system. [Applause] It's certainly not difficult to guess which union has made national health insurance a national issue. Beginning many months ago, Leonard Woodcock has given me an education about the need and the possible ways for meeting it. He's a member of the advisory committee that will help design the whole system and will hold its first meeting later on this week. And we are aiming to submit legislative proposals early next year.
An efficient government means spending money only where it will actually benefit our people. We've proposed a $350-million increase in the Title I education funds for poor and deprived little children. We've proposed raising the basic opportunity grants from $1,400 to $1,800 a year, to help families put their children through college.
Although it's never going to be an exact science, I think we've got to go a long way in higher education institutions and also in the Government, particularly the Department of Labor and so forth, Department of HEW, in trying to match in a predictable way the jobs that are going to be available, and that graduates are going to be coming out of our colleges, so the jobs will be there when you get ready to graduate. It's not an exact science, obviously, but I think we'll be better off in the future than we have been in the past.Good luck to you, by the way.
But the long-range problem is to restore confidence of citizens who live in a community in the structure of government, police officers, the housing opportunities, good jobs, and this obviously was not the case in New York. So, I think that this is an additional indication of the need to channel government programs for housing, health, education, job opportunities in the deteriorating urban areas that have been neglected too long.
If the purpose of the Government-and I think its legitimate purpose--is to prevent the birth of unwanted children, I think the best way to spend limited Federal moneys, again, is in the education of sometimes ignorant young people, women and men, and making available to them family planning instruction plus contraceptive devices that would prevent a pregnancy to begin with.
A lot of young people serve in the Army who are minority members of our communities. I appointed the first black Secretary of the Army. The head of all education programs in the Nation happens to be a black woman.
THE PRESIDENT. I have had a discussion with both the Secretary of HEW, Mr. Califano, and the Attorney General about this case. And I think that we will prevent a reversion to the previous discrimination that did exist; at the same time, we want to respect the need for an adequate level of education for minority groups in our country, and we also want to preserve the heritage and background and history that is part of the lives of minority families.
We are now approving 1,000 public works projects every week, with at least 10 percent of that allocation money being guaranteed to minority business people. And in addition to that, we have taken the CETA jobs, the comprehensive education and training jobs, and have multiplied them by more than a hundred percent, more than 200 percent.
And we've also seen that there has been a great educational process taking place in this country. Although we've lost the ERA vote in several States this year, those losses have been much narrower than had been the losses in the same States before. So progress has been made, even in States where we have not yet been successful.
Nigeria has also moved to establish universal primary education and to use the wealth that has come from their natural resources, as has our own country in the past and at present, to enrich the lives of the people who live there.
On the bilingual approach to many problems, not just in education--of course, this is something we are pursuing. I promised this during the campaign and will continue with it.
THE PRESIDENT. That's a good and a tough question to answer. And, Courtney, I can't tell you that I've got the answer. We have, in the whole country, now brought the unemployment rate down, I'd say, about 1 percent below what it was a year ago. And as you've already heard, in Detroit itself in the last 2 or 3 years, the unemployment rate has dropped about 75 percent. But that still means that when you have a 6 or 7 percent unemployment rate nationwide among young men like you, who are black, who have a fairly good education even, the unemployment rate runs 35 or 40 percent, which is entirely too high.
But if the Government has programs that help with unemployment, that help with the education of low-income children and housing, and if Government programs give some emphasis on the development of the neighborhoods, which are where people live, and consult with the people who live in neighborhoods, and if, perhaps, you could appoint a Presidential commission on urban neighborhoods to make sure you're not just dealing with city hall, but to make sure that programs are relating to neighborhoods, that would help all of us. Thank you.
When I was Governor, I was chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission. There are 13 States that belong to it, as you know. And this is an area that has been devastated in the past, was perhaps the poorest region of our Nation, may still be the poorest region of our Nation, geographically speaking. This poverty, as you point out so well, has forced many, several million people, from that mountain region into the urban centers. Quite often, they don't have the technical skills or the educational background or experience to survive and help themselves once they get in an urban environment. I think that this is likely to improve.
Secondly, we have still very pressing educational problems. Even though we are making some progress in education here, we still have 40,000 young people in Detroit between the ages of 16 and 20 that are dropouts from the school system. And our regular programs don't take care of them. No State programs are dealing with these young dropouts. So, we need new alternative education programs that give us a chance to recapture these young people and provide a new quality of life for them, because they will have the educational base they need.
MRS. PRIETO. Mr. President, I am Luz Maria Prieto of Chicago, Illinois. I work for a group called Mujeres Latinas en Accion, or Latin Women in Action. We're a group of Latino women in Chicago. And knowing that--we know the problems of the barrios and the problems of the women. We have to struggle just to survive. And the woman has the greatest burden to survive for her family. We have to struggle through a disastrous educational system, a health system that we don't understand and sometimes does us a great deal of harm, and a great deal of underemployment because we are working women and have to work just to keep our families afloat. We're away from all the debates of things that affect us--domestic violence, abortion, drug abuse.
The sad part is not that we not only have no voice in these debates, but these are all debates about reactions to the problems. The women in the neighborhoods don't want just to react. We want to control our own destinies. And we need very simple answers, it seems to us, if we could say something about it. We need quality education, all the way down from child care, all around the clock, that's bilingual and bicultural, education for our children, education for the women who have to go back so we'd have real skills, skills that would benefit us and our families and would build up our communities, not just being dumped from one public sector job to another.
Other than that, education, you know--we have dropouts. It's many a reasons for these dropouts. We never had a committee to go out and find out why these dropouts are out of high school. We need people that's in the community to get into these programs.
I guess what I'm saying is that there are hopes and plans and even some successes on alternative energy sources, particularly for people on fixed income, because I'm sure we're not going to be able to get supplemental appropriations every year for this type of problem. So, we must work on the alternative sources and on education, on the real issues surrounding energy.
The question I want to ask you, President, is that, what is the reason why, when programs are funded for Latinos, Chicanos, or Hispanic communities--and they are just getting off the ground--they seem to be taken away from us, including the city of Detroit? What I want to ask you, President Carter, is, for example--at the present time there is a need for this type of education, of programs, not only in the black community but in the Latino communities. For example, at the present time. President Carter and Ms. Olivarez, LULAC National Education Service Centers has only a chance to be funded until December. This is the one and only top educational center mechanism that the Latino community has all over the United States. They only have fundings up to December. I am concerned, because it deals with all the issues that Mrs. Prieto and Mrs. Molina have addressed in the Latino community. I am concerned, just like all my brothers here in southwest Detroit. I am also a product of Michigan. I am concerned with what will you, President Carter, do in alleviating our problem when our funding for our Latinos programs, for Hispanic communities, are detailed, are not funded to the capacity that is needed. We need an answer on that, Mr. President.
Ms. OLIVAREZ. Mr. President, that particular project is an educational project that isn't designed exclusively for poor people. They have been funded by our agency for--it will be 4 1/2 years in January. And we have asked them to go to the Office of Education for that kind of money, because we don't have enough money to fund educational centers. Sometimes I think we wind up subsidizing the other agencies that have larger budgets.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
The second thing we are doing is to. make sure in all our programs that deal with disabilities that we are emphasizing not institutional care, but community oriented small units, where the children can be close to their families, close to their own homes, where the cost is much less and the benefit of training programs and education programs are greatly magnified.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Our hope has been and our goal has been to work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular and to encourage South Africa to move toward the elimination of some of those racial problems which they've had historically, to do away with apartheid, to give an equal opportunity for employment, job promotion, education, and the participation in the political and economic affairs of South Africa for all its citizens.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Palestinians have rights, as I described in my United Nations speech, as do all human beings. The Palestinians are one major group of refugees that have been created in the Mideast. Obviously, there are Jewish refugees also. But I think all human beings have the same basic yearning for freedom, for human self-respect, for a home in which they can live, for a right to raise a family, to have education, health care, food. So, I would say in that respect they have the same rights as others do.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, almost every item that's in the domestic budget is directly helpful to the major cities. We proposed hundreds of millions of dollars for basic education, for training programs, for public service jobs, for transportation, for housing, for crime control.
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't favor tuition tax credits under any circumstance, even if it was at a very slight level, because this would inevitably rapidly grow with each succeeding budget; and the first thing that you know, tuition tax credits would be the major Federal expenditure for all education in the United States. And so, I think that tuition tax credits itself, as a subject, is very detrimental to the future of education in our country.
I've tried to fulfill those dreams through new jobs programs, through increased funding for education—more than ever before in the history of our country—and through child health programs.
We didn't have distributive education when I was a child and a student in grammar school and high school. The only vocational program we had was in agriculture, and I was a student there. But I learned a lot about marketing and management, merchandising as a student then. I began to sell boiled peanuts when I was 5 years old. [Laughter] It was a lot of hard work, and I very carefully saved my money. And after 3 full years, 4 full years of selling boiled peanuts and not spending any of the money, I had saved up enough in 1933 to buy five bales of cotton. Cotton got down to 5 cents a pound; peanuts were only 1 cent a pound.
I know in Georgia, for instance, the distributive education students have taken on a special project of exposing and helping to control shoplifting, a very strong contribution to controlling crime in our country. There might be equivalent opportunities in all the States of our Nation.
I am also aware of how good your own experience in distributive education pays off in your own life. Ninety percent of all the distributive education students go on beyond high school to a higher education. I wish this was the case with all students in our country; it's not. And so you've set an example in that respect as well and give your own present life and your own future families an opportunity that you wouldn't otherwise have, not just to make a higher income but to have a life that's more exciting, more challenging, more compatible with the finest aspects of our country.
HARRY A. APPLEGATE. Mr. President, ever since Congress created attention to this instructional phase of education, we believe we have met the challenge with a very successful program. But the uniqueness of it has been our insistence on cooperation and placement with the private sector. We continue a national advisory board, which consists of representatives of some 60 major corporations in the Nation, and we continue a congressional advisory board, with some 30 Members of the Senate and the House, continuing to help guide and direct us in that effort.
The second thing we want is to have a chance to expand our lives, to have a bigger heart to encompass new friends, to have a bigger mind to learn more about the world that God gave us. And the educational process ought not to stop when we graduate from college or even when we start a new career or when we finish a new career, because there are people in their seventies and eighties, as you know, who still have a dynamic approach, not just to today but to tomorrow. And that is an element that needs to be emphasized in our lives.
I want to be sure that all of you live not only a secure life, one dedicated to constant education and expansion of your minds and hearts that I've already described, but one that is productive. There is no reason why someone who has finished a business or professional career can't live an even greater, broader, more productive life when the years of retirement arrive. You have much greater flexibility in making your own decisions. You have more free time to broaden your interests and your influence. And this can be the kindling of an expansive life for every one of you.
There may be a time when they don't feel that they have a single staunch, dependable friend in the community. And it would not be difficult for you through your labor organizations, through your churches, through your civic commitments, to identify a particular family. You may not ever be thanked for it, but you could go and visit that family, get to know the father, the mother—they're retired people perhaps—the children that have problems with the law or in school, and just let them know that you are their friend. And if they do have a problem with the educational system, you could learn what it is, and with your own influence, with your own status in the community, go to the education officials and say, "I know that these poor people who live near me don't have the same opportunity that my children have had or that I had or that most do have." And you could be a voice for a single family; in the process, greatly expand your understanding of people who were deprived and are deprived in our society today.
There will be some indirect impact on the Federal Government now and more direct influence in the future, because there's no doubt about the fact that unemployment will go up in California, as government workers are laid off because of stringent budget requirements. And, of course, our unemployment compensation payments will have to increase. Also, I think we have about 50,000 CETA jobs, comprehensive education training administration jobs worked out jointly with local governments. Many of those may be in danger.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
Several of the Federal agencies which have been involved in our urban policy will be pooling $32 million over the next year to develop, for instance, an improved anticrime program for public housing projects. Funds will be provided by the CETA program for training and education to hire local residents for such important, preventive jobs as manning elevators and patrolling unguarded areas where the crime rate has been very high. Recreation facilities will be built by Interior Department funds for the men, women, children who reside in these projects. And LEAA funds will be provided for counseling and for other services for juveniles living in public housing projects who might be influenced or tempted to resort to a life of crime.
I would say that the tobacco industry, the tobacco farmers, the Federal Government, all .citizens want to have an accurate and an enlightened education program and research program to make the smoking of tobacco even more safe than it is today. And we'll continue these joint programs within which I don't see any incompatibility.
Two years ago I promised the American people that we would revitalize our educational system and to focus the attention of it on the poor and the deprived children who haven't had an adequate chance in life, whose parents perhaps are illiterate and haven't had the will or the motivation or the vision to inspire those little kids. Even compared to the halcyon days of Lyndon Johnson, the Congress has voted the largest increases in funds for school and education in history, and it's focused accurately on those who need it most.
And you ought to realize that we have cut the budget deficit, given jobs, better education, strengthened our defenses. At the same time, last year we had a multibillion dollar tax cut, and we have on schedule now another tax cut for the American people of about $20 billion. That is the kind of fiscal responsibility that American people deserve, to meet our people's needs while balancing the Nation's books.
It's not callous nor hardhearted for a government to deliver food to a hungry person without waste, with efficiency. It's not callous nor hardhearted management to give our children a better education without waste, and efficiently.
I believe our country is rich enough. I believe our people are intelligent enough. I believe we've got enough team spirit in our country to give every family a decent place to live, a good education for the children, safe streets to walk on, a beautiful place to look at and, also, jobs for our people and a better life for all. That's what I believe we can have.
Florida needs a man who can come from a position as an underdog and be triumphant over nine other very worthy, dedicated, competent candidates who challenged him. Florida needs a man who knows about education, who served as the chairman of the Senate Education Committee, who's worked as a teacher, who knows what it means to give our young people, indeed our old people as well, a chance to continue to stretch minds, to stretch hearts throughout their life's existence.
And when your forebears first reached this valley, in less than 3 years there was a new college. At that time there was a common belief in our Nation that women couldn't stand the rigors of college life, but you knew different. And now this State has the highest educational level of any State in the Nation.
There are legitimate roles for a government to perform: to assure that our Nation lives in peace; to assure that our people have an opportunity for employment, for jobs, to use what talent God might have given them in a sustained and productive way; to eliminate the threats to society, to the family—drugs, crime; to initiate preventive health care; to provide for better education, transportation, security; to cut down on some of the afflictions, such as unwanted pregnancies that lead to abortions, things that deeply religious people and others deplore; to raise the ideals of individuals; and to sustain the ideals and morals of a nation itself.
We must and we will continue to provide every child in America a chance to learn and to flower and to grow with the best education we can provide. Last year, we added to the Federal education budget about $12 billion, more than had ever been added before, because we know that what the Negro College Fund brochures say is right: "A mind, a human mind, is a terrible thing to waste?' And that's why in a budget that will fight inflation, I have preserved and will fight for new support, increased support to educate disadvantaged children in our Nation, for Headstart, for the handicapped, and for the struggling college student that wants to realize his potential.
The poor who were not able to pay for a college education were the first to go to war and to give their lives to a country that had made it possible for them to be deprived of opportunity. This must never happen again.
It's a positive peace that we now seek-peace that keeps alive his audacious dream that all people can have food and health care for their bodies, education and culture for their minds, and dignity, equality, and freedom for their spirits.
We've greatly increased funding for social services, for health, for housing, and for education, and we are today working to pass comprehensive health insurance, another long overdue aid to families. I also hope to implement major improvements in our policies and programs concerning foster care and adoption. Such programs, if poorly administered, have often hurt rather than helped children and families.
We have a time of great difficulty in our country. And here in the White House, as President, of course, I have to be primarily concerned about our Nation's security, about defense, about the maintenance of peace. But that responsibility cannot be separated from my own as the chief law enforcement officer of our country, and the preservation of justice, fairness, equity, the control of crime, the enhancement of respect among every citizen of our Nation for our governmental processes. You have very difficult jobs as local police officials, as State officials, as attorneys general, as representatives of the Federal Government in the control of drug traffic, in education, and in administration.
THE PRESIDENT. No, we didn't discuss that, but I observe very carefully Vernon's statements. I've known him for a long time. When he was in charge of voter registration in the southeastern region of our country, he was living in Atlanta. I was a State senator then. Vernon was planning to run for Congress from the Fifth District in Georgia; I was planning to run for Governor. We both wound up with different positions later on. And Vernon has sometimes been a very severe critic of policies of the Federal Government, actions of the Congress, actions by me, or failure to move rapidly enough to alleviate the concerns of the poor people about whom he's concerned. But, at the same time, we've always maintained our friendship. And I'm familiar with Vernon's speeches, the major thrust of them. I listen to them very carefully.
When I've made decisions in my own administration, as President, concerning urban areas or housing or education or the provision of jobs for the poor or welfare programs, care for the aged, I've almost invariably called Vernon in to give me his advice and his counsel and, hopefully, his support if the program that we evolved met with his approval. And I've done this with just a few other leaders in the country. I've done this because of the position he holds, because of my confidence in his judgment, and also because of a personal friendship.
So, obviously it's a reminder, but I don't see that it's directly related to what we are doing. I'm trying to protect the domestic allocation of funds for jobs and for housing and for health and education in the budget dispute with the Congress right now, and I know that in this particular dispute, Vernon Jordan and what he stands for would be a major ally. But we did not discuss the particular programs in my brief visit with him.
Thank you very much.
No one wants government interference in our personal affairs. We don't want government in our kitchens, in our bedrooms, in our living rooms, monitoring-certainly not controlling—family life. But we know that regardless of that commitment that government does touch our families through the tax system, public education, social security health, housing, human services, transportation—government touches our families.
As a Nation, we are faced with serious problems both at home and abroad, and almost every one of those problems that we address has a direct effect on an individual family. The solutions we've worked out will either strengthen or weaken those families—as I deal with inflation, as we bring down interest. rates—touches every family in this country.
When we create jobs, it helps the families of this country. When we improve education, helps every family. Better health care helps every family. When we insist on equal justice under the law or equal rights under the Constitution for all people, we help the American family. And when we work for a secure nation and a peaceful world, we help the American family.
We can build an America where parents are partners with the schools in education. We can build an America where the tasks of the family life are valued and recognized as very important work. We can build an America where employees don't have to make the horrible choice between responsibilities as workers on the one hand, and responsibilities as parents on the other.
I'm committed to securing for all children in America an equal chance to learn and to excel. There's a saying in Spanish, "Negar la educacion a nuestros ninos es la ruina de las naciones." [To deny education to our children is the ruin of nations.] And if we deny a good education to our children, it could bring about the ruin of the Nation we love. We've increased Federal support for education, leaving control of our schools at the local and State level where it ought to be. We've greatly increased bilingual education, more than double since I've been in office, because we know that too many children, as they learn English, must also be able to learn other subjects at the same time.
THE PRESIDENT. As you know, the other border States at this time provide education for the undocumented alien children, undocumented worker-children. This is a matter that is in the Federal courts. It would not be proper for me as President, because of the separation between the Executive and the judiciary, to involve myself in it. The State government, which has a substantial surplus which we don't yet enjoy in the Federal Government, has maintained that impact aid should be given to the Texas schools. This is not legal and will not be done, because impact aid is designed for communities that have extra costs in their school systems because of military bases and other Federal installations, and not because the State government happens to disagree with the Federal Government on an issue.
So the responsibility as presently expressed by the Supreme Court of the United States is that education must be provided for the undocumented worker-children, and I don't believe there's any possibility for impact aid from the Federal Government. The other States are complying with this ruling, and I feel sure that Texas will do the same since the courts have ruled.
Thank you.
So I think that you, as a bright young man, ought to do everything you can to make sure that there's equal opportunity for all the children, regardless of their race or how much their parents are worth in money, and that there's a good quality education for everybody and that people have a maximum chance to do what they wish, to go to the school of their own choice.
In addition to that, we will have in the future a constantly expanding commitment by the Federal Government to education, both private and public, with the new Department of Education. In the past, the education programs have been buried underneath welfare and health. There has not been a single person in Washington where your parents or a school board member or a Governor could go and say, "We've got a problem," with private or public education, preschool, grammar school, high school, or college. "What can you do about it?" Now, Secretary Shirley Hufstedler is the new Secretary of a brand new Department of Education.
Also, before we get any further, I represent the educational—[inaudible]—of Indian affairs. Indian discrimination—[inaudible]—Indian, and I know it still stands in Indian schools and Indian hospitals. I stand for their chiefs, for the chiefs' document, with Dr. Hector P. Garcia, for the education of anybody that can't afford it. Forty percent Federal aided—[inaudible]—for the people of the United States of America. I believe that our President is for the people, all people, the poor. It doesn't make any difference.
MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
MR. HILLIARD. President Carter, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit, mass transit. Under the windfall profits tax, we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country. We also are pursuing housing programs. We've had a 73-percent increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education. These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders, particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that had been deteriorating so rapidly in the past.
MR. SMITH. Gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, for 60 years the League of Women Voters has been committed to citizen education and effective participation of Americans in governmental and political affairs. The most critical element of all in that process is an informed citizen who goes to the polls and who votes.
MR. HILLIARD. Yes, Governor Reagan, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in the services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
MR. HILLIARD. President Carter, the decline of our cities has been hastened by the continual rise in crime, strained race relations, the fall in the quality of public education, the persistence of abnormal poverty in a rich nation, and a decline in services to the public. The signs seem to point toward a deterioration that could lead to the establishment of a permanent underclass in the cities. What, specifically, would you do in the next 4 years to reverse this trend?
We now are planning to continue the revitalization program with increased commitments of rapid transit, mass transit. Under the windfall profits tax, we expect to spend about $43 billion in the next 10 years to rebuild the transportation systems of our country. We also are pursuing housing programs. We've had a 73-percent increase in the allotment of Federal funds for improved education. These are the kinds of efforts worked on a joint basis with community leaders, particularly in the minority areas of the central cities that had been deteriorating so rapidly in the past.
MR. SMITH. Gentlemen, ladies and gentlemen, for 60 years the League of Women Voters has been committed to citizen education and effective participation of Americans in governmental and political affairs. The most critical element of all in that process is an informed citizen who goes to the polls and who votes.
I'll just add one other thing: When you look at it on a job/cost ratio basis, how many jobs do you get for a million dollars spent? One of the most inefficient industries is the defense weapons industry. And I think that we need not continue with a supposition that in the long run the expenditure of the limited amount of financial resources of the whole world and of our own country is going to be increased or decreased. When you spend money for defense, you don't spend it on education or health or other services or goods. And I think the shift away from weapons toward peaceful goods and services in the long run is favorable for world peace, and also you get more jobs per dollar spent.
So, I think that we are moving now in the Labor Department to put together a special program for Vietnam veterans. The Congress has recently decided to extend GI Bill of Rights benefits for the full 10 years, which will help a lot of those who would have lost their education opportunities from losing those opportunities. Also, for the first time in my lifetime we've got quite a young man, who's familiar with the recent war, in charge of the entire Veterans Administration itself. I appointed Max Cleland, who happens to be a triple amputee and who's a very tough, young administrator, to be in charge of the Veterans Administration.
There is a strong trend in our country now toward more career or vocational training and away from a college education.
Ultimately, in a person's life I don't think it makes that much difference. This is a choice that each person has to make. And I know that the most important consideration is that when you finish a training program as a licensed practical nurse or a stenographer or an automobile mechanic or a bricklayer or when you get a Ph.D. in physics or philosophy, the major thing is to have a way to be employed when your education is over and to use your only life that God gives you here on Earth to a useful and productive way.
So, as a young person yourself, I hope that you will continue your education. And I hope that by the time you graduate we will have done something about the unemployment rate so that you can get a job without any problem.
THE PRESIDENT. Thank you very much.One thing I would like to remind all of you on is this: When you ask a question, for instance, about the problems of small business, I know that you probably know more about the subject than I do, particularly the one that asked the question that has a problem. And we would like very much, as a follow-up, if you have specific ideas on how we might have a better health program, or better education for young people, or better training programs for those who are unemployed, or a better welfare system, or better help for small business, that you write me a letter and put Clinton, Massachusetts, in a big circle on the front of the letter, and I'll tell my staff to bring those letters directly to me.
And I want the American people, after 3 or 4 years at least, not to look on the Federal Government as an enemy, or an obstacle to be overcome, but as a friend that's constantly probing for better ways to let your own life be meaningful. And if you have a problem of unemployment or too much inflation, or not enough education, or not enough 'health care, or inadequate roads or the threat of death from nuclear weapons, I hope that in the future you will say that "my elected officials in Washington or in Boston will help me work out of this problem."
I don't know that Senator McGovern's speech to the ADA was mirrored in the objections by any other Democrats. Obviously, we have a firm belief in the character of the Democratic Party, that we're the ones who are responsible more than any other party in this country's existence for the provision of jobs for our people, a better life for those who are afflicted, who are poor, who are disadvantaged, who need education and need security in their old age. These kinds of programs have been put forward by me to the Congress in a very strong and continuing way.
I think it's accurate to say that Secretary of HEW Califano agrees with me completely. And we are trying to make it possible for the people of this Nation to understand how to prevent unwanted pregnancies with education programs and with the availability of contraceptives and other devices, when they believe in their use, as an alternative to abortion. But I don't believe that either States or the Federal Government should be required to finance abortions.
But the long-range problem is to restore confidence of citizens who live in a community in the structure of government, police officers, the housing opportunities, good jobs, and this obviously was not the case in New York. So, I think that this is an additional indication of the need to channel government programs for housing, health, education, job opportunities in the deteriorating urban areas that have been neglected too long.
If the purpose of the Government-and I think its legitimate purpose--is to prevent the birth of unwanted children, I think the best way to spend limited Federal moneys, again, is in the education of sometimes ignorant young people, women and men, and making available to them family planning instruction plus contraceptive devices that would prevent a pregnancy to begin with.
A lot of young people serve in the Army who are minority members of our communities. I appointed the first black Secretary of the Army. The head of all education programs in the Nation happens to be a black woman.
THE PRESIDENT. I have had a discussion with both the Secretary of HEW, Mr. Califano, and the Attorney General about this case. And I think that we will prevent a reversion to the previous discrimination that did exist; at the same time, we want to respect the need for an adequate level of education for minority groups in our country, and we also want to preserve the heritage and background and history that is part of the lives of minority families.
THE PRESIDENT. I hate to endorse the proposition of quotas for minority groups, for women or for anyone else, that contravene the concept of merit selection. However, I think it is appropriate for both private employers, the public governments, and also institutions of education, health, and so forth, to try to compensate as well as possible for past discrimination, and also to take into consideration the fact that many tests that are used to screen applicants quite often are inadvertently biased against those whose environment and whose training might be different from white majority representatives of our society.
We discussed other matters--oil exploration, enhancement of your port facilities, construction of new highways, the high percentage of your national budget that's spent for education, improvement of health care. These kind of things are very good for us to see.
So, I believe that time and education and knowledge about the treaties will lead to increasing support in the Senate. So, I have confidence that the Senate will ratify when the vote does come.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think the difference between what I expected and what was sometimes covered by the news media has been different. When someone running for a 4-year term of office makes promises to do certain things--in the Middle East, in defense, in agriculture, in education, social security, energy--that doesn't mean that you think you can do it the first year and that nothing will be left to be done the other 3 years.
We must take steps to avoid exporting our economic difficulties to other nations, whether rich or poor. And we must use the tools of shared freedom to increase the choices and opportunities of our economic system. We can share our experience in social development, in education, health care, social services, and the organization and management of farms and factories.
The fifth and the final item on the new agenda for democracy is to cooperate among .ourselves in adapting to global change. The same factors which led to our economic successes over the past two generations science, technology, education, health, will, and wisdom of our people-have also altered the interrelationship between the industrial democracies on the one hand and the developing world on the other.
We can share our experience in social development in education, health care, social services, the organization and management of factory and farm.
Food stamp reform, which was accomplished last year, is one example. We'll have a substantial increase in the allotment of funds for housing, for urban development, for education, for transportation, for providing jobs for those who are currently unemployed. And I think we've brought back a great deal of the balance that ought to exist between the downtown, sometimes deteriorating urban centers on the one hand, and the suburban areas on the other.
We are trying to rebuild both the interest at the local community level and also the Federal Government involvement in the downtown urban areas which, I think, had been to some degree neglected. Quite often the Congress would design a program in the past for the more rapidly deteriorating, more needy parts of the country, but because of the better organization, higher level of education and public awareness, higher degree of political influence, the suburbs, completely legally, would get most of the benefits of those programs. We are trying to provide a better balance now.
In a separate written message to Congress, I've outlined other domestic initiatives, such as welfare reform, consumer protection, basic education skills, urban policy, reform of our labor laws, and national health care later on this year. I will not repeat these tonight. But there are several other points that I would like to make directly to you.
One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as passionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose children have a far smaller chance for good health or food or education or human fulfillment than a child born in this country.
We had a President, Franklin Roosevelt, and we had memories and a history of the past with the fathers of our country, Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, and others, who had always had faith in common, ordinary, honest, hard-working American people. They trusted the judgment of those who are not powerful and influential, who sometimes are not wealthy or even well-educated, who do have a deep sense of what our Nation has been, is, and can be, a deep religious faith, a belief that the family, if it's tight-knit and filled with love, is the best source of inspiration, education, and preparation for an adult life. We learned what it meant to struggle and to obtain a good education.
THE PRESIDENT. As you know, before I was President I was Governor of Georgia for 4 years, and my wife, Rosalynn, and I both undertook the mental health program in our State as a major new task. We were successful then in putting into effect a strong preventive care program, and an attempt, through diet and through education in the prenatal months of a mother's life and also in the early stages of a child's life, to prevent future mental illnesses.
This past year we initiated a strong economic stimulus package, and I think our economy was helped greatly. I just pointed out a few minutes ago that the unemployment rate in New England, which had been 8 1/2 percent when I took office, dropped to 5 1/2 percent in 1 year. I can't predict that that downward rate is going to continue. I don't know about the future. But we will have going to the Congress next week from me a recommendation for a $13 billion continuation of the comprehensive education and training act, because the Democrats have always felt that people who don't have great wealth ought to have an opportunity for vocational training and education tied directly to a job. We've advocated more than doubling public service employment and greatly expanding jobs for young people. And I think you know that the civil rights acts were initiated and passed by a Democratic President working with a Democratic Congress.
THE PRESIDENT. There is already a bill in the government organization committee under Senator Ribicoff, to set up a separate department of education. When I first went into government, I was on a local school board. I ran for the Georgia Senate, and I was the chairman of the university committee and in the education committee.
When I was Governor, I would say I spent 25 percent of my time, at least, working on improvements in education.
I doubt that I've spent a half of 1 percent of my time dealing with educational matters as President. Education is buried deep within the same department as health and welfare, which are the more dominant matters of interest, at least in Washington. And I believe that in that process, education is neglected.
There's a tremendous opportunity in our country to get back to basic education. We've got too many people, I think, going into the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grades that can't even read and write. And we've got too many vocational and technical schools, career training programs, high schools, even colleges turning out students that are not accurately matched in their learning capabilities with the jobs that are available when they graduate.
There's very little correlation between jobs that need to be filled and the product of our. educational institutions.
I think that this is also a matter that ties very closely to employment, in the comprehensive education and training programs, you know, working with both private employers and also with the State and local governments as well as the Federal Government, where you can have a combination of training and education. I've .just advocated recently a tremendous increase in scholarships and loans, grants and work-study programs for college students.
The Federal Government is just now getting involved in that process. We also have a real need to tie together the training and education programs for the mentally afflicted Americans, or those who are slow learners, and in many ways I think the Federal Government ought to give more attention to education.
I think the control of the education system ought to be at the State and local government. I don't want to get the Federal Government into controlling of any colleges or high schools or grammar schools or kindergartens. But I just would like to have as President a much more sure sense that I'm devoting an adequate amount of my own time to bringing about a raising of educational standards in our country.
We spend too much money and get too little education benefits back from it, and I think a separate education department or agency with that one single responsibility would give education the high visibility on a national level and the voice of the President promoting better education, that I don't think will ever be possible with education buried in Health, Education, and Welfare.
THE PRESIDENT. For college education?
One of the things that has endangered the entire college aid program has been the deliberate cheating by college students off the taxpayers when they signed a contract, "If you will lend me money to get my college education, I will repay it and let that money go to help another student." And because of a loophole in the law, many students would finish college and immediately declare bankruptcy so they would not have to repay the loan I don't have any sympathy for a student who does that on purpose. And I think we ought to do everything we can to collect those loans when they've been made in good faith and received in good faith, because the ones who suffer are the taxpayers in general and also other students who could benefit if that first student did his or her duty.
I think most of the groups that represent handicapped people agree that this is true. It applies not only to jobs and to educational opportunities, to special education grants and loans that are available but it also applies to physical facilities, the design of buildings, the design of buses and other transportation available.
I might say that there are things that can be done to prevent an unwanted birth—an education program, the availability of contraceptives for those who believe in their use, family planning programs, more easy adoptions, and so forth. And we are moving on those areas, too.
We've got tax laws that ought to be changed and made fair. They have too many loopholes in them, and the working families of our country have not had an adequate voice in Washington or in the Congress or the White House for a long time. But now the Democratic Party, working together on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, want to have a fair and equitable tax system, along with a much lower tax burden. We want to give some tax breaks for middle-income families to let them keep more of their money to put their kids through college, to have a better education system. How many of you agree with that? [Applause]
I'd like to spend the brief time I have with you answering questions that you might have to present to me, but I would like to say that we are grateful for your coming. You represent an element of leadership, both present and future, that's very valuable to our country. And I know that your interest in both higher education and government is exemplified by your presence here.
I don't see the two to be interrelated at all. I believe that to provide government funding for abortion is, in effect, a means of encouraging abortion as one extension of contraceptive procedures. I think a good education program, the making available of contraceptive devices for those who believe in their use, and encouragement of the facility with which unwanted children perhaps can be adopted, is a much better alternative.
THE PRESIDENT. No, not to put a statutory limit on what a local government can do on taxation. I don't know of any Federal—obviously, as we increase Federal contributions in the field of transportation or health, environmental quality, education, that cuts down on the amount of contribution that local taxpayers have to pay.
And the last point that I'd like to make that is a major responsibility of yours that I recognize very clearly, is that of public education. I think there are a lot of misapprehensions about energy of all kinds, in particular, nuclear fuels.
Now, compare that with the Republican Party. Its answer to just about every serious question and problem in this country has been one word—"no." Before I got elected with your help, the Republican administration even said no to putting people back to work. But we Democrats are saying yes to better education, yes to decent health care, yes to a real effort to stop inflation with mutual sacrifice, yes to tax reduction and tax reform, yes to solving our energy crisis, yes to reorganization and efficiency in government, and yes to human rights in our own country and throughout the world.
We ended the Republican cutbacks in aid to education. And I noticed from what Mike said, you've got the same philosophy in the State Capitol, to cut back education. We tried to change that. In fact, we've increased aid to education more than ever before in history, and we put the emphasis back on the efficient use of funds for basic learning skills.
I'm perfectly willing to meet any special interest group, no matter how benevolent, and hold my own in spite of the political consequences. And that includes business, it includes labor, it includes education, it includes transportation, it includes farmers, it includes all those groups who are very sincere and very good Americans, but who have to recognize that this year, at least, and perhaps next year as well, we have got to constrain inflation.
THE PRESIDENT. I'll be glad to. Of course, one of the most severe problems in the ghetto areas have been deterioration of the quality of life, not just housing, transportation, law enforcement, health care, education, but also a matter that struck to the heart of those regions, and that was the unemployment question.
Transportation, education, all are very important. We've added more education dollars to the Federal contribution than ever before in history, even under Lyndon Johnson, but, you know, we don't administer the elementary and secondary schools. That's got to be done at the State level and the local level, and that's the way it ought to be. So, we'll do our part. I'm sure you'll do your part to make us bring about some resolution of these longstanding, chronic sufferings in our country that are unwarranted, primarily because of past discriminations and present lack of knowledge or callousness about those who are less fortunate than all of us assembled here.
I congratulate the members of the Class of 1978. Although your education from the perspective of an older person has just begun, you have laid the foundation for a career that can be as rewarding and as challenging as any in the world.

I'd like to give one example. In education, we had a 24-percent increase in the educational budget in the proposed expenditures for next year compared to the current year. Still, the Congress wants to increase this more. In basic opportunity grants for college students, we advocated an increase of 47 percent as an alternative to tax credits for tuition. That's a $1.1 billion increase. Now the Congress wants to add several hundred million dollars more, completely excessive and threatening to unbalance the budget even further.
The other point I'd like to make is a general one, and that is we are going to have to hold the line on the budget. And I presented a very adequate budget to the Congress, prepared back in November and December, when the prospect of inflation was not nearly so alarming. The Congress has been inclined to take these adequate proposals and expand them considerably over a broad range of interests-education, labor, defense, agriculture, transportation, health, and so forth. And this has got to be controlled.
There will be some indirect impact on the Federal Government now and more direct influence in the future, because there's no doubt about the fact that unemployment will go up in California, as government workers are laid off because of stringent budget requirements. And, of course, our unemployment compensation payments will have to increase. Also, I think we have about 50,000 CETA jobs, comprehensive education training administration jobs worked out jointly with local governments. Many of those may be in danger.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
We must strengthen the government closest to the people. Business, labor, agriculture, education, science, and government should not struggle in isolation from one another but should be able to strive toward mutual goals and shared opportunities. We should make major investments in people and not in buildings and weapons. The poor, the aged, the weak, the afflicted must be treated with respect and compassion and with love.
We can have an America that provides excellence in education to my child and your child and every child.
I understand that unemployment and inflation are very real, and have done great harm to many American families. Nothing makes it harder to provide decent health, housing, and education for our people, protect our environment, or to realize our goal of a balanced budget, than a stagnant economy.
There are many other areas of domestic policy--housing, health, crime, education, agriculture, and others--that will concern me as President but which I do not have time to discuss tonight.
So, I want to congratulate you for being selected. And I want to second the President's point that you realize that with this opportunity comes a special responsibility; because I have been around Washington long enough to watch people like you come down here and watch many of them grow and develop into community leaders, State leaders, public leaders, religious leaders, business leaders, leaders in education--all walks of life. And I hope that will happen to each of you, that you really go back now and let this be not just a great trip that you are on--it is unusual--but the beginning of a magnificent life of public service, that special dimension that we are all privileged to be a part of as Americans in a free society.
Finally, I want to say something about the Hearst family. You know, in our country we have a marvelous institution of philanthropy, of charitable and educational giving, and people of substance often give for various causes. But it is a funny thing. You usually don't see the family that did it, but that is not true of the Senate Youth Program.
I've had a chance, the last 2 years, to travel around our Nation, perhaps more than any other person in history in a 2-year period, to talk some, but to listen a lot. And I've seen the tremendous impact that can be derived from this Department on our people's lives, because of your own professional competence, your experience, your intelligence and, above all, your compassion and your love for other people. To me, the success or failure of my own administration depends upon you and others who work in the health and education and welfare and other related fields.
I think there is a pent-up desire on the part of our people to serve in a voluntary way--in mental health programs and environmental quality programs, in dealing with the problems of education and many other questions that face our people and which can never be handled exclusively by our Government employees.
I'll just add one other thing: When you look at it on a job/cost ratio basis, how many jobs do you get for a million dollars spent? One of the most inefficient industries is the defense weapons industry. And I think that we need not continue with a supposition that in the long run the expenditure of the limited amount of financial resources of the whole world and of our own country is going to be increased or decreased. When you spend money for defense, you don't spend it on education or health or other services or goods. And I think the shift away from weapons toward peaceful goods and services in the long run is favorable for world peace, and also you get more jobs per dollar spent.
So, I think that we are moving now in the Labor Department to put together a special program for Vietnam veterans. The Congress has recently decided to extend GI Bill of Rights benefits for the full 10 years, which will help a lot of those who would have lost their education opportunities from losing those opportunities. Also, for the first time in my lifetime we've got quite a young man, who's familiar with the recent war, in charge of the entire Veterans Administration itself. I appointed Max Cleland, who happens to be a triple amputee and who's a very tough, young administrator, to be in charge of the Veterans Administration.
There is a strong trend in our country now toward more career or vocational training and away from a college education.
Ultimately, in a person's life I don't think it makes that much difference. This is a choice that each person has to make. And I know that the most important consideration is that when you finish a training program as a licensed practical nurse or a stenographer or an automobile mechanic or a bricklayer or when you get a Ph.D. in physics or philosophy, the major thing is to have a way to be employed when your education is over and to use your only life that God gives you here on Earth to a useful and productive way.
So, as a young person yourself, I hope that you will continue your education. And I hope that by the time you graduate we will have done something about the unemployment rate so that you can get a job without any problem.
THE PRESIDENT. Thank you very much.One thing I would like to remind all of you on is this: When you ask a question, for instance, about the problems of small business, I know that you probably know more about the subject than I do, particularly the one that asked the question that has a problem. And we would like very much, as a follow-up, if you have specific ideas on how we might have a better health program, or better education for young people, or better training programs for those who are unemployed, or a better welfare system, or better help for small business, that you write me a letter and put Clinton, Massachusetts, in a big circle on the front of the letter, and I'll tell my staff to bring those letters directly to me.
And I want the American people, after 3 or 4 years at least, not to look on the Federal Government as an enemy, or an obstacle to be overcome, but as a friend that's constantly probing for better ways to let your own life be meaningful. And if you have a problem of unemployment or too much inflation, or not enough education, or not enough 'health care, or inadequate roads or the threat of death from nuclear weapons, I hope that in the future you will say that "my elected officials in Washington or in Boston will help me work out of this problem."
I come from a part of the United States which is largely agrarian and which for many years did not have the advantages of adequate transportation or capital or management skills or education which were available in the industrial States of our country.
This issue is important in itself. It should not block progress on other important matters affecting the security and well-being of our people and of world peace. It is obvious that the reduction of tension, the control of nuclear arms, the achievement of harmony in the troubled areas of the world, and the provision of food, good health, and education will independently contribute to advancing the human condition.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, one of the most delightful experiences in the life of any person is to have a schoolteacher, at any level of education, who forms a personal relationship with his student that serves as a lifetime inspiration. I've had that experience in my own life, and I know that when it comes time to choose from among the hundreds of thousands of teachers in our country, some one person to exemplify the meaning of a good teacher, it's a very difficult task. And to be chosen the Teacher of the Year in the whole Nation is an extraordinary honor.
I know that California has an extraordinarily good education system, and I am very grateful to have this beautiful demonstration of handiwork in California, and I'll use it. When I leave, I'll let it be part of the White House furnishings so
that future Presidents can also enjoy it. Thank you very much.
MRS. LEE. Thank you.
We want to be sure that at the beginning of this new administration, under the leadership of Sam Brown and Mary King1 that we reassess the most effective way to use this tremendous untapped resource of American citizens of very young age and very old age, highly educated, and those who have little education at all, who want to work with us among people who need their direct and personal help and advice, counsel, and support.
THE PRESIDENT. I think that the Soviet response has been predictable. I've been somewhat concerned lately that they've decided to go public as much as they have. But I have to say that there is a very important distinction that ought to be drawn between private and determined and continuing negotiations which are being pursued on the one hand, and the education of the public, the presentation of issues to people in our own country, which has always been the case since I've been in office. And it's very encouraging to know that now Mr. Brezhnev and his other leaders, through Pravda, are explaining the Soviet position to the people of Russia.
We are blessed with a deep awareness of the devastation of previous wars. There is a widespread sense of waste and frustration in spending so much of a country's resources on weapons, when economic progress and better health care and education needs cry out to be met. And when Secretary Vance visited all the leaders in the Middle Eastern region, a unanimous statement was, "We wish that we could stop spending so much on the weapons of war."
We have a special mutual commitment toward world peace, toward addressing in a courageous fashion the special problems that afflict human beings in the need for better health care and better education and jobs so that we won't be robbed by inflation.
I don't know that Senator McGovern's speech to the ADA was mirrored in the objections by any other Democrats. Obviously, we have a firm belief in the character of the Democratic Party, that we're the ones who are responsible more than any other party in this country's existence for the provision of jobs for our people, a better life for those who are afflicted, who are poor, who are disadvantaged, who need education and need security in their old age. These kinds of programs have been put forward by me to the Congress in a very strong and continuing way.
The domestic problems which we do face as Americans are difficult, indeed, but we have the courage and the ingenuity and the greatness of spirit to meet these challenges. I believe that we can build an America in which our day-to-day practices live up to our democratic ideals, in which the family life, mine and yours, is strong and stable, in which the neighborhoods of our cities are vital and safe, in which work is available and is justly rewarded, in which opportunity is not limited by color or sex or religion or economic or educational background, in which there is schooling and employment for the young and dignity and security for the old.
However, it's interesting to point out, at the recent London summit conference, the single issue of most concern to the seven heads of state assembled there was unemployment among young people. In the ideological struggle with the Eastern Socialist and Communist countries, this is our one major vulnerability. We have got to provide in our country an economic system that's healthy enough and an education system that's competent enough so that when our young people reach the age of 18 or 19 years old, they can find a way to use the talent and ability and opportunities that God gave them and not enter adult life discouraged and excluded from society. This ought to be number one in all our efforts in the future.
And finally, I'm committed to the phasing-in of a workable national health insurance system. [Applause] It's certainly not difficult to guess which union has made national health insurance a national issue. Beginning many months ago, Leonard Woodcock has given me an education about the need and the possible ways for meeting it. He's a member of the advisory committee that will help design the whole system and will hold its first meeting later on this week. And we are aiming to submit legislative proposals early next year.
An efficient government means spending money only where it will actually benefit our people. We've proposed a $350-million increase in the Title I education funds for poor and deprived little children. We've proposed raising the basic opportunity grants from $1,400 to $1,800 a year, to help families put their children through college.
Although it's never going to be an exact science, I think we've got to go a long way in higher education institutions and also in the Government, particularly the Department of Labor and so forth, Department of HEW, in trying to match in a predictable way the jobs that are going to be available, and that graduates are going to be coming out of our colleges, so the jobs will be there when you get ready to graduate. It's not an exact science, obviously, but I think we'll be better off in the future than we have been in the past.Good luck to you, by the way.
For too long, handicapped people have been deprived of a right to an education. For too long, handicapped people have been excluded from the possibility of jobs and employment where they could support themselves. For too long, handicapped people have been kept out of buildings, have been kept off of streets and sidewalks, have been excluded from private and public transportation, and have been deprived of a simple right in many instances just to communicate with one another.
It would be a mistake for the rest of America to think that the benefits are only going to the handicapped, because when you get freedom, we share that freedom, and when the handicapped get benefits of education and a job and a purposeful life, we all share in the benefits of that education, that job, and a purposeful life.
There is a hope that there will never be any lack of memory for the struggle that has been effective in making this night and this conference possible. We want to be sure that we don't forget the handicapped among us who cannot hold a job, who cannot respond to a full education, but we want to make sure that even when they are dependent for constant help, that they have every chance to grow and to learn and to take advantage of whatever great or small talent or ability God might have given them. We can't forget them.
It's not a time for hatred or lashing out or recrimination or condemnation of the nonhandicapped for the long delays in meeting your needs, because many people who are not handicapped can't understand those special needs. So, it's a time of education both ways, and for a realization that only when we work together--the handicapped who are leaders, the handicapped who will always be dependent, the potentially handicapped child who wants to have that prevented and the nonhandicapped adult leader--when we work together, we can continue to make even greater progress.
And I think that one of the other great breakthroughs, which I don't use myself, is the observation of television. I don't watch television much myself, but I think that for many people just to see what the outside world is has not only been an educational process but has raised expectations and the concepts of what one could do.
To close my answer, I might say that when I went home in 1953 in the winter, I very quickly went on the local school board. And we had separate but so-called equal educational opportunities in the South. They were separate, but they certainly were not equal. The white kids rode to school on buses; the black kids walked. And the white kids had fairly modern buildings; the black kids went to school in basements of homes, on the back porch of private homes, and in dilapidated churches.
One of the things that we hope to do in the developing nations of the world is to provide them access to our communications satellites where they can reach impenetrable areas and bind together people in a common spirit, sometimes a nationalistic spirit, but receive better education and better knowledge. So, in general, I think the trend has been for the benefit of working families, even as a result of the industrial revolution. And I have good hopes about the future.
But I think in the overall thrust of our programs concerning energy, transportation, welfare reform, tax reform, housing, education, that you will see a constant pattern to try to rebuild the strength of the cities. When I mentioned a few minutes ago the retirement problem, this has been one of the questions in New York City, in Philadelphia, and other places where inadequate long-range projections of cost are proving to be sometimes an almost financial catastrophe. Now some cities have taxed themselves heavily to maintain the integrity of a retirement fund. Others have simply approved the very liberal retirement benefits and haven't funded it at all.
We have needed an energy policy for a long time. We've needed welfare reform for a long time. We've needed to have the social security system revised and made sound for a long time. We've needed to address the undocumented workers question for many years. And of course, in the field of education, housing, transportation, the needs of our country are very great. We can't answer these questions or solve these problems alone. And I think it's accurate to say that I need you much worse than you need me.
Well, that was not the case in the recent war in Vietnam. It was not a popular war. Most of the young people who went were too poor to hide in college and escape the draft; others went, like Max Cleland, who already had a college education, because he was highly patriotic and deeply motivated.
Well, now our Nation is healing its wounds. We are proud of the fact we were finally extricated from the Vietnam involvement. And we are trying to repair our image around the world as a nation who made a mistake. And we feel secure once more, and feel clean once more, and proud once more, but we still have a tremendous number, hundreds of thousands, of young men in their early twenties or later who don't have the education and don't have the background and don't have the job security because they did go to fight for our country.
Well, I feel responsible for them, and your presence here indicates that you feel responsible for them, too. We are looking for jobs for those young people. We have got more than a half million Vietnam veterans who don't have jobs. And under our own economic stimulus package which the Congress has passed almost in its entirety, we asked for training and education programs to put people in jobs-about $6.8 billion. We wanted 35 percent of that to go to Vietnam veterans and other veterans. That was not approved, but we believe that of the 725,000 public service jobs, that local officials, State officials will try to give places and opportunities for those young veterans.
And I hope that in your own lives, no matter what it might be in the future, in business or professions or agriculture or education or politics, that you will keep those thoughts in mind.
I am not an expert on the subject, but this is a continuation of my own education about this matter. We want to have an opportunity for strengthening the free enterprise system in our country to make sure that competition exists in a fair and equitable way, to be sure that we have some protection for small communities that now receive commercial airline service.
The first week, I was on television frequently and tried to project to the American people my own deep concerns. But that cannot be a continuing thing. Your cumulative education program can correct this inherent deficiency in our system of government.
I know that you realize the value of our free enterprise system which is part of our free societal structure, which values the independence of human beings, which recognizes the innate worth of individuals, and which also puts a premium on self reliance and the exertion of extraordinary energies to bring about exemplary results. And the merger which has always been a part of our societal structure between business and the professions, our educational institutions, agriculture, government at all levels, is very important to us now.
I think it's accurate to say that Secretary of HEW Califano agrees with me completely. And we are trying to make it possible for the people of this Nation to understand how to prevent unwanted pregnancies with education programs and with the availability of contraceptives and other devices, when they believe in their use, as an alternative to abortion. But I don't believe that either States or the Federal Government should be required to finance abortions.
I think there's a historical trend that is almost inevitable that I detect and have to recognize; and that is, that we're shifting more and more toward having economic growth based on a higher quality of life, which means an increasing foundation of things like better health care, better education, more recreation, and not the long, tedious hours of labor that went into the production of goods.
But the long-range problem is to restore confidence of citizens who live in a community in the structure of government, police officers, the housing opportunities, good jobs, and this obviously was not the case in New York. So, I think that this is an additional indication of the need to channel government programs for housing, health, education, job opportunities in the deteriorating urban areas that have been neglected too long.
If the purpose of the Government-and I think its legitimate purpose--is to prevent the birth of unwanted children, I think the best way to spend limited Federal moneys, again, is in the education of sometimes ignorant young people, women and men, and making available to them family planning instruction plus contraceptive devices that would prevent a pregnancy to begin with.
A lot of young people serve in the Army who are minority members of our communities. I appointed the first black Secretary of the Army. The head of all education programs in the Nation happens to be a black woman.
THE PRESIDENT. I have had a discussion with both the Secretary of HEW, Mr. Califano, and the Attorney General about this case. And I think that we will prevent a reversion to the previous discrimination that did exist; at the same time, we want to respect the need for an adequate level of education for minority groups in our country, and we also want to preserve the heritage and background and history that is part of the lives of minority families.
So, with a good education program, with a firm stand not to encourage abortions as a normal way of life, and with the provision to poor people of government supported contraceptive devices if the person believes in their use, these are the alternatives that I personally favor in preference to abortions.
Walter Mondale, my Vice President, worked for years unsuccessfully, 8 years, to try to get a $100-million increase in the Title I programs for a better education for poor people, poor children. We have already proposed, and the Congress has already agreed, to increase the Title I program more than $350 million.
THE PRESIDENT. I hate to endorse the proposition of quotas for minority groups, for women or for anyone else, that contravene the concept of merit selection. However, I think it is appropriate for both private employers, the public governments, and also institutions of education, health, and so forth, to try to compensate as well as possible for past discrimination, and also to take into consideration the fact that many tests that are used to screen applicants quite often are inadvertently biased against those whose environment and whose training might be different from white majority representatives of our society.
We are now approving 1,000 public works projects every week, with at least 10 percent of that allocation money being guaranteed to minority business people. And in addition to that, we have taken the CETA jobs, the comprehensive education and training jobs, and have multiplied them by more than a hundred percent, more than 200 percent.
I'm very honored that he would come and meet with me today and tomorrow and to visit us in the White House tonight. I've been talking to him about ground nuts--[laughter]--and life in the rural area and his struggle for a good education and what his religious life means to him and the impact of his father on his social consciousness. And I've learned a lot about him in the process.
Many of the people in the audience today in the educational institutions have been involved in the preparation of the program which I will initiate today by signing an Executive order. But equally important are the administrators of our Government agencies who are also in the audience, who will find very valuable, I'm sure, these interns who will come in to serve for 2 years.
We have high hopes that this will meet all of our objectives and that it will be successful in every way. I think one other ancillary benefit will be that we can more directly tap the tremendous reservoir of innovation, education, experiment, advice, and counsel that exist within our higher educational institutions that are not often used by Government. And I think the intern program itself, because it has to be a shared program, will help to tie together much more closely our educational institutions and the Government on a continuing basis.
We discussed other matters--oil exploration, enhancement of your port facilities, construction of new highways, the high percentage of your national budget that's spent for education, improvement of health care. These kind of things are very good for us to see.
The passage of the New Jersey income tax was unpopular. As I campaigned here last year, I could see that at first hand. But in the process now, with property taxes going down, rebates, about a quarter of a billion dollars to property tax payers, lower property taxes, over $500 million extra money going into better education for your children, and the soundness of New Jersey's fiscal integrity giving you a legitimate source of pride-his courage and his good judgment and that of many of you has begun to pay off.
When Brendan Byrne came into office, New Jersey was 49th among all the States in getting Federal program aid for housing, transportation, education, law enforcement. And now that situation has dramatically changed, and New Jersey has already moved up to 34th. Well, I don't want him to go much further. [Laughter] But I think this shows that with him in office, working with Pete Williams and the other congressional leaders that you've chosen, New Jersey can benefit by just getting back your fair share of the Federal tax dollars which you have been paying historically and which, too often, have been going to other States for their benefit and which are now coming to your State for your benefit.
When Brendan Byrne became Governor of New Jersey, New Jersey ranked 49th in the amount of your Federal tax money that came back to your State for better education, better housing, better transportation, better law enforcement, and other programs that help your families--49th. Even when we had a Republican administration, there was great progress made with Frank 'Thompson, other members of the congressional delegation working with Brendan Byrne.
So, in many ways, including environmental quality, health care, law enforcement, progress for education, pride, recreation, the Brendan Byrne administration has done you a good job.
And I believe that it's important to you as a State that does have economic problems, a State that does have a new lease on life, a State that does now have strict controls over elections, openness in dealing with your own government, a good relationship between administrators and employees in State government, one that's struggling for better transportation, housing, health care, and education, to keep a good administrator in office.
This tax was designed to give you more than $500 million more for better education. This tax was designed to cut property taxes. And your own mayor told me a few minutes ago that not only have property taxes been cut 7 percent in Newark but they will be kept cut next year as well.
So, we must work together to give you better education, fairer tax programs, a good quality place to live, good housing, better health care, prevention of disease, and an opportunity for jobs. The worst single domestic problem that I face--and it's also faced by your Governor and your mayor and the Congress--is unemployment, and particularly in urban areas.
Brendan Byrne is a man who will fight for you if you don't have a job. Brendan Byrne is a man who will fight for you if you're a working-class family. Brendan Byrne is a man who will fight for you if you want better health care, better housing, better education.
I know that attendance here tonight in a way is a mark of esteem, and I was proud to get what was a very hurried picture with each one of you because I know that you are leaders in your own, in business or the professions, in education, in labor, in protecting the interest of people who depend upon you.
Now, I just want to make one other statement, and then I would like to close. I like to see someone who seeks a major office have courage. I don't know of any issue that's come along in the Southland in my life or in the last 100 years that's been more important nor more controversial than the question of equality, freedom, voting rights, good education for the black people who live among us.
In 1959 I was not in politics. I was just a farmer. But Georgia was looking at Virginia, because Virginia politicians--maybe some of you in the audience--had decided, "We will not integrate our schools. We'd rather close them down and let our children do without any public education than to take that difficult step." It was a common thing all over the South. But there was at least one man that I know about in Virginia that ran for the State Legislature, and he said, "Let's take the padlocks off the schoolhouse doors." Do you know who that was? It was Henry Howell.
We join together in matters that affect all human beings--a search for peace in the world, a reduction in armaments, a channeling of scarce financial and human resources to give people a better life, a life with education possible, better health care, more human freedom, the rule by the black majorities in the African nations.
I might add, also, that we want to have very close and friendly bilateral relationships between the United States and every one of your countries. We now have about 2,000 Peace Corps volunteers in 23 nations in Africa. In the past, I know that this has been an effort about which there has been some doubt. But if you have a special need for technical help or help with agriculture, education, health, if you would let me know or Secretary of State Vance or Ambassador Andrew Young, we would be glad to participate with you on this basis, with your having control, of course, over how these volunteers might strengthen the ties between our country and yours.
Just the prevention of war is certainly not enough. But the enhancement of education opportunities, better health care for the people of the world, a searching out of commerce, dealing with the laws of the seas and elimination of racism and many other of the most complicated and challenging confrontations with human beings are now being channeled more and more into the United Nations.
But I do see one or two things in common. One is that the ancient civilizations of the world are represented here--the fountainhead for knowledge and science and education, mathematics, medicine, culture, music, art, drama. And it's a very stimulating and exciting thing for me to meet representatives of those historic peoples who have meant so much to the formation of human society.
I notice also that many of you have moved strongly toward a concept of preservation of human freedoms and the right of people to be treated well. I've noticed expansion of the definition of human rights in my own consciousness to encompass the right of someone to have a place to work and a place to live and an education and an absence of disease, and, perhaps, an alleviation of hunger. And I know that in many countries of the world represented here, those are ever-present problems for you as they are even for a wealthy and powerful nation like the United States.
Nigeria has also moved to establish universal primary education and to use the wealth that has come from their natural resources, as has our own country in the past and at present, to enrich the lives of the people who live there.
On the bilingual approach to many problems, not just in education--of course, this is something we are pursuing. I promised this during the campaign and will continue with it.
THE PRESIDENT. That's a good and a tough question to answer. And, Courtney, I can't tell you that I've got the answer. We have, in the whole country, now brought the unemployment rate down, I'd say, about 1 percent below what it was a year ago. And as you've already heard, in Detroit itself in the last 2 or 3 years, the unemployment rate has dropped about 75 percent. But that still means that when you have a 6 or 7 percent unemployment rate nationwide among young men like you, who are black, who have a fairly good education even, the unemployment rate runs 35 or 40 percent, which is entirely too high.
But if the Government has programs that help with unemployment, that help with the education of low-income children and housing, and if Government programs give some emphasis on the development of the neighborhoods, which are where people live, and consult with the people who live in neighborhoods, and if, perhaps, you could appoint a Presidential commission on urban neighborhoods to make sure you're not just dealing with city hall, but to make sure that programs are relating to neighborhoods, that would help all of us. Thank you.
When I was Governor, I was chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission. There are 13 States that belong to it, as you know. And this is an area that has been devastated in the past, was perhaps the poorest region of our Nation, may still be the poorest region of our Nation, geographically speaking. This poverty, as you point out so well, has forced many, several million people, from that mountain region into the urban centers. Quite often, they don't have the technical skills or the educational background or experience to survive and help themselves once they get in an urban environment. I think that this is likely to improve.
Secondly, we have still very pressing educational problems. Even though we are making some progress in education here, we still have 40,000 young people in Detroit between the ages of 16 and 20 that are dropouts from the school system. And our regular programs don't take care of them. No State programs are dealing with these young dropouts. So, we need new alternative education programs that give us a chance to recapture these young people and provide a new quality of life for them, because they will have the educational base they need.
MRS. PRIETO. Mr. President, I am Luz Maria Prieto of Chicago, Illinois. I work for a group called Mujeres Latinas en Accion, or Latin Women in Action. We're a group of Latino women in Chicago. And knowing that--we know the problems of the barrios and the problems of the women. We have to struggle just to survive. And the woman has the greatest burden to survive for her family. We have to struggle through a disastrous educational system, a health system that we don't understand and sometimes does us a great deal of harm, and a great deal of underemployment because we are working women and have to work just to keep our families afloat. We're away from all the debates of things that affect us--domestic violence, abortion, drug abuse.
The sad part is not that we not only have no voice in these debates, but these are all debates about reactions to the problems. The women in the neighborhoods don't want just to react. We want to control our own destinies. And we need very simple answers, it seems to us, if we could say something about it. We need quality education, all the way down from child care, all around the clock, that's bilingual and bicultural, education for our children, education for the women who have to go back so we'd have real skills, skills that would benefit us and our families and would build up our communities, not just being dumped from one public sector job to another.
Other than that, education, you know--we have dropouts. It's many a reasons for these dropouts. We never had a committee to go out and find out why these dropouts are out of high school. We need people that's in the community to get into these programs.
I guess what I'm saying is that there are hopes and plans and even some successes on alternative energy sources, particularly for people on fixed income, because I'm sure we're not going to be able to get supplemental appropriations every year for this type of problem. So, we must work on the alternative sources and on education, on the real issues surrounding energy.
The question I want to ask you, President, is that, what is the reason why, when programs are funded for Latinos, Chicanos, or Hispanic communities--and they are just getting off the ground--they seem to be taken away from us, including the city of Detroit? What I want to ask you, President Carter, is, for example--at the present time there is a need for this type of education, of programs, not only in the black community but in the Latino communities. For example, at the present time. President Carter and Ms. Olivarez, LULAC National Education Service Centers has only a chance to be funded until December. This is the one and only top educational center mechanism that the Latino community has all over the United States. They only have fundings up to December. I am concerned, because it deals with all the issues that Mrs. Prieto and Mrs. Molina have addressed in the Latino community. I am concerned, just like all my brothers here in southwest Detroit. I am also a product of Michigan. I am concerned with what will you, President Carter, do in alleviating our problem when our funding for our Latinos programs, for Hispanic communities, are detailed, are not funded to the capacity that is needed. We need an answer on that, Mr. President.
Ms. OLIVAREZ. Mr. President, that particular project is an educational project that isn't designed exclusively for poor people. They have been funded by our agency for--it will be 4 1/2 years in January. And we have asked them to go to the Office of Education for that kind of money, because we don't have enough money to fund educational centers. Sometimes I think we wind up subsidizing the other agencies that have larger budgets.
What is your administration doing today for the children with learning disabilities, in terms of education, specialized training, and especially financial support for the children in low-income houses? People with low income can't afford the training their children need and have to send them to school where the teachers and the programs are not geared for the children with learning disabilities. These children suffer, and it's an emotional problem. It is a physical problem, and it scars them for the rest of their lives. And most of society neglects it and ignores it. The problems surface later, sometime in dropouts, in crime, and in many other areas. Thank you.
The second thing we are doing is to. make sure in all our programs that deal with disabilities that we are emphasizing not institutional care, but community oriented small units, where the children can be close to their families, close to their own homes, where the cost is much less and the benefit of training programs and education programs are greatly magnified.
So, I believe that time and education and knowledge about the treaties will lead to increasing support in the Senate. So, I have confidence that the Senate will ratify when the vote does come.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Our hope has been and our goal has been to work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular and to encourage South Africa to move toward the elimination of some of those racial problems which they've had historically, to do away with apartheid, to give an equal opportunity for employment, job promotion, education, and the participation in the political and economic affairs of South Africa for all its citizens.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Palestinians have rights, as I described in my United Nations speech, as do all human beings. The Palestinians are one major group of refugees that have been created in the Mideast. Obviously, there are Jewish refugees also. But I think all human beings have the same basic yearning for freedom, for human self-respect, for a home in which they can live, for a right to raise a family, to have education, health care, food. So, I would say in that respect they have the same rights as others do.
I doubt if any other group of refugees in my lifetime have been so devastated by war than those from Vietnam and Laos, Cambodia. And it's been a very controversial thing domestically to have people come into our country who don't know the language, who are not, at the time they come, self-sufficient, and who, when they receive language training and vocational training and education and job placement, compete for scarce jobs.
This bill from the House, number 7769, acknowledges our gratitude and also our debt, also our commitment to a better life for the refugees who have been here for a number of months, even years, from Southeast Asia and those who have come just this year. It permits the granting to them of additional opportunity for language training, for vocational training, for basic education principles, for counseling, for job placement.
Last quarter, about $3 billion of that program was in effect. By the end of this quarter, $18 billion will be in effect and, in the first quarter of next year, the full amount. We believe that this will have a beneficial impact on unemployment rates, but it certainly won't solve the problem. We will by next June, for instance, have 725,000 jobs under the comprehensive education and training program. This is the highest level for jobs of this category supported directly by the Federal Government since the New Deal days under Roosevelt.
One of the obvious purposes is to give a superb education to those students in our Nation who could not otherwise afford it. Another one is to preserve the uniqueness of a curriculum and a student body commitment that mirror quite often the yearnings and the frustrations and the desires and the hopes and the dreams and aspirations of families of those students who, because of racial prejudice and discrimination, did not have a chance for a good education or to broaden their hearts and their minds. And in many ways these modern-day students of minority groups represent not only themselves but they represent their families and their other ancestors who have been so severely deprived.
We have an obligation to them to redress longstanding grievances and to let the progress in the future mirror not just a degree which represents the progress of the rest of our Nation's educational society, but a much more rapid rate of progress to overcome some of the handicaps that have been inflicted upon these people in the past.
There's also been a growth in the wellbeing of the people there. They've expanded the opportunity for good health care as well as education.
The Shah is very gracious in his attitude toward Americans. In addition to the 175,000 students in his own colleges, there are about 30,000 Iranian students in the colleges of the United States. And this guarantees an investment in the future of understanding of one another. We have about 40,000 Americans in Iran, and in a very gracious demonstration of friendship which was not well publicized at all, the Shah has provided extra allotments of funds and educational opportunities for American young students there--boys and girls who are at the grammar school and high school level. This is something that he didn't have to do, but it was just an extra demonstration of how valuable they consider our friendship with them.
Peter C. Goldmark, formerly of CBS, now with Goldmark Communication Corporation, Connecticut, for contributions to the development of the communication sciences for education, entertainment, culture, and human service. His work in electronics and television has had widespread applications in our space program, in medicine, in our enjoyment of music, entertainment, and education in our homes.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think the difference between what I expected and what was sometimes covered by the news media has been different. When someone running for a 4-year term of office makes promises to do certain things--in the Middle East, in defense, in agriculture, in education, social security, energy--that doesn't mean that you think you can do it the first year and that nothing will be left to be done the other 3 years.
MR. MACNEIL. Mr. President, when you were still running for office, you told me in an interview--when I asked you, perhaps embarrassingly, what your weakness was, you said perhaps a difficulty to compromise. It had been difficult with the Georgia Legislature, and it might be a difficulty with the Congress. Has this year in Washington been an education in compromise?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, yes. I'm not sure if I had an 'adequate education yet, because I still find it difficult to compromise. But I'm learning. One way that I have learned since I've been here to avoid having to compromise so much is by involving the congressional leaders in the decision in the initial stages. When we evolved the reorganization bill and when we put together the Energy Department, when we evolved the social security bill and other measures that were controversial, we consulted very closely with congressional leaders ahead of time. So I'm trying to avoid having to yield to my weakness, which is a difficulty in compromising. I'm learning every day, I think.
There has been a tremendous revival, biological revival, of our people. in the current decade, the age of maturity is being reached by 7 million of young Polish girls and boys. We ensure to all of them education and work. We have created just, democratic, socio-political conditions. We are implementing the fullest possible code of socio-economic and political rights.
THE PRESIDENT. First Secretary and Mrs. Gierek, distinguished leaders in politics, the military, music, drama, art, poetry, education, science, engineering:
The first modern school was established in Iran in the year 1836 by American missionaries. The American College in Tehran, which was established 100 years ago, was an outstanding center for the education and training of Iranian youth during the whole course of its activities. Our people carry such good memories of its beloved principal, Dr. Samuel Jordan, that one of the highways of Tehran has been named after him.
On another plane, many volunteers-like your esteemed mother—have built bonds of kinship between individuals and families across the oceans. This deep commitment to things of the mind and spirit, the sustained exchanges in the field of art, education, and culture, along with personal relationships, make for strong but invisible bonds which are only possible between open societies.
We share a common measurement of greatness, not power or pomp or ceremony or uniforms or outward show of greatness, but we recognize that greatness is present when the least of those in our nations are treated well and cared for, when their afflictions are eased, and when they have food and education and a healthy life.
We must take steps to avoid exporting our economic difficulties to other nations, whether rich or poor. And we must use the tools of shared freedom to increase the choices and opportunities of our economic system. We can share our experience in social development, in education, health care, social services, and the organization and management of farms and factories.
The fifth and the final item on the new agenda for democracy is to cooperate among .ourselves in adapting to global change. The same factors which led to our economic successes over the past two generations science, technology, education, health, will, and wisdom of our people-have also altered the interrelationship between the industrial democracies on the one hand and the developing world on the other.
Another is economic benefit, which guarantees free people a chance for food, shelter, health, education, and a chance for their spirits to grow.
We can share our experience in social development in education, health care, social services, the organization and management of factory and farm.
Food stamp reform, which was accomplished last year, is one example. We'll have a substantial increase in the allotment of funds for housing, for urban development, for education, for transportation, for providing jobs for those who are currently unemployed. And I think we've brought back a great deal of the balance that ought to exist between the downtown, sometimes deteriorating urban centers on the one hand, and the suburban areas on the other.
We are trying to rebuild both the interest at the local community level and also the Federal Government involvement in the downtown urban areas which, I think, had been to some degree neglected. Quite often the Congress would design a program in the past for the more rapidly deteriorating, more needy parts of the country, but because of the better organization, higher level of education and public awareness, higher degree of political influence, the suburbs, completely legally, would get most of the benefits of those programs. We are trying to provide a better balance now.
In a separate written message to Congress, I've outlined other domestic initiatives, such as welfare reform, consumer protection, basic education skills, urban policy, reform of our labor laws, and national health care later on this year. I will not repeat these tonight. But there are several other points that I would like to make directly to you.
One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as passionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose children have a far smaller chance for good health or food or education or human fulfillment than a child born in this country.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, almost every item that's in the domestic budget is directly helpful to the major cities. We proposed hundreds of millions of dollars for basic education, for training programs, for public service jobs, for transportation, for housing, for crime control.
We had a President, Franklin Roosevelt, and we had memories and a history of the past with the fathers of our country, Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, and others, who had always had faith in common, ordinary, honest, hard-working American people. They trusted the judgment of those who are not powerful and influential, who sometimes are not wealthy or even well-educated, who do have a deep sense of what our Nation has been, is, and can be, a deep religious faith, a belief that the family, if it's tight-knit and filled with love, is the best source of inspiration, education, and preparation for an adult life. We learned what it meant to struggle and to obtain a good education.
My own background and education is in science, in engineering, where there's a constant search for change, for improvement, for what is absolutely required to look years into the future to see the meaning of the discovery of atomic power, its use for destruction, its use for the benefit of human beings. These kinds of consequences of present action are not easy to predict, but it's important that we try. And the same thing happens in government.
Most of the initiative for solving a deteriorating neighborhood must come from the people who live there, or who are directly concerned about the quality of life there. The local government, the State government can move in to help with better police protection, garbage collection, water supplies, education. The Federal Government with its major programs, giving their authority as much as possible to local people, can provide the finances and the guidance that's needed. This is very important.
We've not yet been successful in correlating a highly expensive, sometimes very effective education training program with a need for the graduates to serve.
Prior to the President's remarks, reports were presented on major theme areas considered by the Conference participants by workshop chairpersons Paul N. Ylvisaker, dean of graduate education of Harvard University, Ortense Dixon, vice president of Texas Southern University, Charlotte Williams, Genesee County (Mich.) Commissioner, Charles E. Bishop, president of the University of Arkansas, Phyllis Lanphere, member of the Seattle, Wash., city council, and James A. Norton, chancellor of higher education for the State of Ohio.
Today the cost of sending a son or daughter to college is an increasingly serious burden on America's low- and middleincome families. From 1967 to 1976, in just a 10-year period, the cost of college education increased 77 percent. This year the average bill for tuition, room, and board in a private college is more than $4,800, and at a typical public university a student would have to pay $2,500 per year for education-related costs.
Increasingly, middle-income families, not just the lower income families, are being stretched to their financial limits by these new and growing costs of a university or college education. No one should be denied the opportunity for a college education for financial reasons alone. And our Nation has long recognized our obligation to help lower income families in this educational area.
We do have a good program going. Our emphasis this year will be on basic educational quality, and we're trying in a special way to make opportunities available for high school graduates to go on to college.
I've just increased the proposed allocation of funds for education, which brings the increase in 1 year above 15 percent to about 20 percent. We want this trend to continue.
When I first found that I would be moving to Washington, Rosalynn and I had some very sincere and quiet talks between us about Amy's own education. We had heard bad reports about the public school system in the District of Columbia. But I felt rather than move away from the schools, that we ought to get ourselves more deeply involved in the public school system, thinking at that time that there might be some sacrifice on the part of Amy to demonstrate the First Family's interest and commitment to the public school system.
We have a group of good Members of Congress. I think their commitment to education is superb. I've gotten to know those leaders very well in recent months.
I would like to say in closing that I believe that we need and I believe that we will get a separate department of education. This is a matter that I considered very carefully before I promised your officers before the election that I would do.
Since I've been in the White House, I've had the need for this separate department impressed even more vividly on my mind. When I was Governor for 4 years, I would guess at least 20 or 25 percent of my time was spent in dealing with issues directly related to public education at the elementary, secondary, preschool, or the college level. This is a subject that rarely arises at a Cabinet meeting of your Government in Washington.
The only time it does arise is when there's a legal question involving civil rights or the allocation of funds. And I would say that the Attorney General really has more of a problem to bring to the Cabinet meeting than does the Secretary of HEW. Joe Califano is a superb man. He's dedicated to a finer education in our country. But the point is that as long as the educational function is buried within a large department with welfare and health, I don't think that education will ever get the visibility that it deserves.
And so, my own experience, where maybe 2 or 3 percent of my time as President, even among domestic issues, is devoted to education, compared to 10 times that much as Governor, shows me that it doesn't have the visibility and the importance that it warrants in our democratic and free society.
But there's an historic commitment among many Members of Congress to support the B-1 program, but that's the present holdup on additional help. But I think whenever we have expanded allocations of funds for education or for transportation or for housing, to some degree it relieves the local governments of a financial burden that they can then channel into special needs, obviously including drinking water in the Chicago area.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think they are justified. I have taken a different philosophy from some of my predecessors in trying to concentrate Federal program funds in the most intensely needful areas. I think in the past there has been a tendency—for instance, in housing, just to use one example, where money is allocated by the Congress with the intention of helping the most destitute regions—that the money is channeled out into the more affluent suburban areas because of the higher educational level, the better organizational structure, the more effective political presentation to program administrators and, quite often, also to a better understanding of what the Federal programs offer.
And the second thing is to ensure that the State legislatures and State boards of regents in the predominantly black colleges didn't give them a lower level of physical and educational service as contrasted with the white colleges.
We have a long way to go in our country in meeting the legitimate needs of citizens who have been deprived too long of equal employment opportunities, equal educational opportunities, and equal opportunities, once they establish, through their own initiative, a business, to be treated fairly by their own government. But we are making progress, and it's gratifying to me to be able to make this brief report to you.
I don't mean that whatever problem comes up that you have to call the White House to get it done. I think the best approach would be for you to call the member of the Cabinet who's responsible for that particular function. And I hope that after today all of you will know at least fairly clearly which department has which responsibility. Obviously, housing and urban development would come under Pat Harris; the Commerce Department administers the local public works programs and the EDA programs, and that would be Juanita Kreps. Anything related to transportation would be Brock Adams; and anything related to health, education, and welfare, Joe Califano.
He's had a special responsibility also in career education, which is important to me as a person who's had to work all my life. And I come from a part of the country that's very poor; many parts of Maine are very poor.
Those who grow crops under the ground have something in common. We don't make much money. [Laughter] And a lot of our children don't have a chance to get an advanced education and career education. And the matching of the graduates of our vocational schools, high schools, technical schools, with the job opportunities has been the special province in the United States Senate of Senator Bill Hathaway. And he's the author of that legislation that I signed into law this past December.
THE PRESIDENT. As you know, before I was President I was Governor of Georgia for 4 years, and my wife, Rosalynn, and I both undertook the mental health program in our State as a major new task. We were successful then in putting into effect a strong preventive care program, and an attempt, through diet and through education in the prenatal months of a mother's life and also in the early stages of a child's life, to prevent future mental illnesses.
This past year we initiated a strong economic stimulus package, and I think our economy was helped greatly. I just pointed out a few minutes ago that the unemployment rate in New England, which had been 8 1/2 percent when I took office, dropped to 5 1/2 percent in 1 year. I can't predict that that downward rate is going to continue. I don't know about the future. But we will have going to the Congress next week from me a recommendation for a $13 billion continuation of the comprehensive education and training act, because the Democrats have always felt that people who don't have great wealth ought to have an opportunity for vocational training and education tied directly to a job. We've advocated more than doubling public service employment and greatly expanding jobs for young people. And I think you know that the civil rights acts were initiated and passed by a Democratic President working with a Democratic Congress.
THE PRESIDENT. There is already a bill in the government organization committee under Senator Ribicoff, to set up a separate department of education. When I first went into government, I was on a local school board. I ran for the Georgia Senate, and I was the chairman of the university committee and in the education committee.
When I was Governor, I would say I spent 25 percent of my time, at least, working on improvements in education.
I doubt that I've spent a half of 1 percent of my time dealing with educational matters as President. Education is buried deep within the same department as health and welfare, which are the more dominant matters of interest, at least in Washington. And I believe that in that process, education is neglected.
There's a tremendous opportunity in our country to get back to basic education. We've got too many people, I think, going into the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grades that can't even read and write. And we've got too many vocational and technical schools, career training programs, high schools, even colleges turning out students that are not accurately matched in their learning capabilities with the jobs that are available when they graduate.
There's very little correlation between jobs that need to be filled and the product of our. educational institutions.
I think that this is also a matter that ties very closely to employment, in the comprehensive education and training programs, you know, working with both private employers and also with the State and local governments as well as the Federal Government, where you can have a combination of training and education. I've .just advocated recently a tremendous increase in scholarships and loans, grants and work-study programs for college students.
The Federal Government is just now getting involved in that process. We also have a real need to tie together the training and education programs for the mentally afflicted Americans, or those who are slow learners, and in many ways I think the Federal Government ought to give more attention to education.
I think the control of the education system ought to be at the State and local government. I don't want to get the Federal Government into controlling of any colleges or high schools or grammar schools or kindergartens. But I just would like to have as President a much more sure sense that I'm devoting an adequate amount of my own time to bringing about a raising of educational standards in our country.
We spend too much money and get too little education benefits back from it, and I think a separate education department or agency with that one single responsibility would give education the high visibility on a national level and the voice of the President promoting better education, that I don't think will ever be possible with education buried in Health, Education, and Welfare.
THE PRESIDENT. For college education?
One of the things that has endangered the entire college aid program has been the deliberate cheating by college students off the taxpayers when they signed a contract, "If you will lend me money to get my college education, I will repay it and let that money go to help another student." And because of a loophole in the law, many students would finish college and immediately declare bankruptcy so they would not have to repay the loan I don't have any sympathy for a student who does that on purpose. And I think we ought to do everything we can to collect those loans when they've been made in good faith and received in good faith, because the ones who suffer are the taxpayers in general and also other students who could benefit if that first student did his or her duty.
I think most of the groups that represent handicapped people agree that this is true. It applies not only to jobs and to educational opportunities, to special education grants and loans that are available but it also applies to physical facilities, the design of buildings, the design of buses and other transportation available.
I might say that there are things that can be done to prevent an unwanted birth—an education program, the availability of contraceptives for those who believe in their use, family planning programs, more easy adoptions, and so forth. And we are moving on those areas, too.
This is because we were able to give about $6 billion in tax reductions. We were able to provide jobs and training for young people and all those who were unemployed, and we were also able to give many other services to the people. These are temporary programs, but I will send to the Congress next week a recommendation that this $13 billion investment in education and training for those who are unemployed will continue.
THE PRESIDENT. I am not, under any circumstances, willing to see the Federal Government have more control over colleges, high schools, grammar schools, kindergartens, or any other aspect of public education or private education in our Nation. The reason for advocating a separate department of education has nothing to do with control.
When I was Governor of Georgia, I spent about 25 percent of my time trying to have a better education system in our State. It was a constant challenge for me, and I was constantly involved in it, working with the State administrators in education, the classroom teachers, PTA groups, and others.
When I became President, I was deeply concerned about the quality of education in our country. We spend enormous sums of money. We have, in many instances, young people who graduate from high school who can't read and write. They know very little about the political structure of our own Government. They know very little about the principles on which Our Nation was founded.
Too many students who have an undetected problem at the third or fourth grade level are automatically promoted to the fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth grade not being able to read and write. They obviously can't learn other subjects. And I just feel that there are many ways in which the Federal Government can work more closely and in harmony with the State, local governments and private institutions to give education a boost.
I haven't spent a half of 1 percent of my time since I've been President dealing with education issues. It rarely comes up in my weekly Cabinet meetings. When it does, it involves something concerning the Civil Rights Act or some legal aspect of education.
Twice, now, since I've been President, we've had all the State school superintendents come into Washington. The last time they met with me for an extended meeting at the White House, in the White House Mansion itself, to try to get some way where we could have a cutting down of paperwork requirements and a much more active and accurate way to channel available Federal funds into our education system.
I don't think we'll ever have the visibility for education, I don't ever think we'll have the personal involvement of the President and the Secretary at the Cabinet level in education to promote its good points, to correct its deficiencies, as long as we have the department of education buried underneath health and welfare. I just think it needs to be separate. Thank you.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't advocate a tax credit as a means to help finance college education for the middle-income families. On the contrary, what we have proposed, and what I hope the Congress will approve, is a combination of direct grants to students whose families have a moderate or low income, loans to students in the low-, moderate-, and middle-income group, and work-study programs, where the student can receive part-time employment to help finance college education.
We've got tax laws that ought to be changed and made fair. They have too many loopholes in them, and the working families of our country have not had an adequate voice in Washington or in the Congress or the White House for a long time. But now the Democratic Party, working together on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue, want to have a fair and equitable tax system, along with a much lower tax burden. We want to give some tax breaks for middle-income families to let them keep more of their money to put their kids through college, to have a better education system. How many of you agree with that? [Applause]
Good morning, everybody. My first public job was as a member of the Sumter County School Board, and I've never lost my early conviction that the noblest task of government is education. In this task, the Federal Government must be a strong and reliable partner for the State and local governments.
There are three major elements in my education proposals to Congress for this year.
First, I've asked Congress to work with me in creating a Cabinet-level department of education, as was promised during the campaign. Education is far too important a matter to be scattered piecemeal among various Government departments and agencies, which are often busy with sometimes dominant concerns. We must pull our education programs together if we are to assure them of the full attention that they deserve.
No able student should be denied a college education because a family cannot afford it. My proposals now being considered by Congress will bring us closer to making this a reality.
Today, as the third element in this year's educational program, I'm sending Congress my major legislative proposals on elementary and secondary education. Altogether, we are seeking for next year an increase over this year's spending of 26 percent and a total increase of 46 percent—$4 billion increase in these 2 fiscal years.
These much needed, additional funds for elementary and secondary education are the largest proposed by any President since the creation of the program by President Johnson and the Congress more than 10 years ago.
Most of these changes will let us channel Federal funds more efficiently, effectively, and directly to those so often shortchanged in our educational system because of social problems or because of poverty.
I'd like to spend the brief time I have with you answering questions that you might have to present to me, but I would like to say that we are grateful for your coming. You represent an element of leadership, both present and future, that's very valuable to our country. And I know that your interest in both higher education and government is exemplified by your presence here.
I don't see the two to be interrelated at all. I believe that to provide government funding for abortion is, in effect, a means of encouraging abortion as one extension of contraceptive procedures. I think a good education program, the making available of contraceptive devices for those who believe in their use, and encouragement of the facility with which unwanted children perhaps can be adopted, is a much better alternative.
We proposed and put into effect one of the most far-reaching health programs for young people ever seen in our Nation and the biggest increase in the budget for simple education in history.
THE PRESIDENT. No, not to put a statutory limit on what a local government can do on taxation. I don't know of any Federal—obviously, as we increase Federal contributions in the field of transportation or health, environmental quality, education, that cuts down on the amount of contribution that local taxpayers have to pay.
She recognizes, as demonstrated by her success in the classroom, some fundamental principles of education. As a sixthgrade teacher in Colorado she has especially benefited from the fact that children are different; teaching instruction bas to be different for each child. And she's brought a vivid awareness of life to the classroom environment.
Total assistance—in just 2 years—to State and local governments has already been increased by 25 percent, from $68 billion to $85 billion. We've had major improvements in such urban-related programs as the Community Development Block Grant program and the new Urban Development Action Grant program and urban education. I proposed a doubling in our expenditures for employment and training to over $12 billion in 1979, and we have already increased the number of public service jobs by 150 percent. We added 4.1 million new jobs last year.
The United States will increase its efforts, particularly in those countries where governments are themselves most committed to meeting the basic needs of their people for health, education, shelter, and to increasing their own food production.
We understand the broad definition of these two important words—the right to freedom, the right to criticize a government, the right of people to contain within themselves, collectively, the ultimate authority, the right to an education, the right to good health, a place to live, food, the right to share more equitably the riches with which God has blessed us, the right to express opinions, the right to enhance our own individuality, the right to seek collective solutions to private and public problems, the right to expose the greatness of our own nations which we love.
Our bonds of friendship go back many years. Nigerian students first came to the United States in the 19th century. Your first President, Nnamdi Azikiwe, studied in our country. In applying to Lincoln University, he wrote that he believed in education for service and service for humanity.
Tens of thousands of young Nigerians have followed him to America to prepare themselves for service here in their homeland. Many are present or future teachers, who will help you achieve your goal of universal primary education.
I believe, as I know you do as well, that every person also has a right to education, to health care, to nutrition, to shelter, to food, and to employment. These are the foundations on which men and women can build better lives.
The presence of more than 15,000 Nigerian students in the United States and many Americans here underlines the depth of our cooperation in the field of education. We are also bound by economic interests, and we are learning from each other about trade and about industrial and agricultural development.
THE PRESIDENT. We have got now four committees set up, one for the development of Nigerian agriculture. This is a joint effort where we help Nigeria and we learn in the process. Another one of the subcommittees is on education. And we have always had, for many years, a very good relationship here. We want to improve it.
We also discussed the problem of human rights that accrue because of poverty—deprived of a right of a place to live and to adequate food and clothing and education and health care. And through our own contributions to the African Development Bank, our own contributions to the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, through direct bilateral aid, which primarily goes to the very poor countries, and through increased trade and technical service to countries that have had good success, like Nigeria, we are trying to alleviate those human rights and deprivations that come from poverty.
We have seen common themes go throughout every stop we've made. The overwhelming single two words that describe this theme is "human rights" in all its aspects. And the hunger for freedom, the hunger for liberty, the hunger for individuality, the hunger for a right to be free of oppression, to participate in one's own government, to shape one's own destiny, to have something to eat, a place to live, food to drink, and education for one's children, are deprivations that are deeply felt. And the more that leaders of strong nations can speak out openly and aggressively on these subjects for the poor and deprived and the illiterate and the inarticulate people who can't speak out and have their voices heard, the better off will be the whole world.
The last thing I would like to say is this: The bilateral relationships with your country is of great benefit to the United States. You're .one of our most important trading partners. And as I spoke at the Institution on Political Affairs yesterday, the director of that Institute told me afterwards, among the 3,500 or so people there, that more than half of them in the audience had had at least part of their education in the United States. We learn as much from you as you learn from us.
Our friendly relationship is of great mutual advantage and exists on many levels—in the intertwining of our histories, in the democratic tradition established in our own Constitutions, and in the similarity in our forms of government. It exists in education, in trade, and religion. It was perhaps most meaningful in what President Tolbert has called the "war against ignorance, disease, and poverty."
The second element is a respect for human rights—the right to be treated properly by one's own government, to be able to participate in the decisions that affect one's own life, to have the basic human requirements of food, shelter, health, and education.
This is especially true today in Angola, in the Horn of Africa, where we want to see outside military forces and outside influence depart, because we are convinced, as are you, that the people of Africa are completely capable and have the desire to shape their own affairs and need no outside help, except in a mutual bargaining position related to economic development, better health care, better education, better homing, better food, better clothing for the people here.
I think this includes, obviously, peace in Africa. It involves genuine friendship and an equality of treatment, not as a dominant nation looking down on other countries—we need their help as much as they need ours—a hope that human rights in all its aspects, not only freedom from government domination and participation in government on their part but also an alleviation of hunger and an absence of education and job opportunities—food, clothing, health care might be alleviated. All these are good things.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think that's an accurate assessment. I think that our whole international emphasis on human rights would be undercut and fruitless if we didn't set an example in our country of being very insistent that human rights be protected here. And also, it's important for us to acknowledge that we still have a long way to go in giving our people genuine human rights, not just political rights but also the right to, as I said earlier, to an education, to health care, to good housing, good clothing, good place to live.
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't favor tuition tax credits under any circumstance, even if it was at a very slight level, because this would inevitably rapidly grow with each succeeding budget; and the first thing that you know, tuition tax credits would be the major Federal expenditure for all education in the United States. And so, I think that tuition tax credits itself, as a subject, is very detrimental to the future of education in our country.
I've seen a resurgence throughout the world of interest in basic human rights. Again, this quiet, decent man has epitomized America's commitment for the world to see, of the preservation of innate human freedoms, an absence of political persecution, and the right of a person to live in a decent home, to have food to eat, an education for one's children, decent health care, and a right to develop as an individual.
I've tried to fulfill those dreams through new jobs programs, through increased funding for education—more than ever before in the history of our country—and through child health programs.
We didn't have distributive education when I was a child and a student in grammar school and high school. The only vocational program we had was in agriculture, and I was a student there. But I learned a lot about marketing and management, merchandising as a student then. I began to sell boiled peanuts when I was 5 years old. [Laughter] It was a lot of hard work, and I very carefully saved my money. And after 3 full years, 4 full years of selling boiled peanuts and not spending any of the money, I had saved up enough in 1933 to buy five bales of cotton. Cotton got down to 5 cents a pound; peanuts were only 1 cent a pound.
I know in Georgia, for instance, the distributive education students have taken on a special project of exposing and helping to control shoplifting, a very strong contribution to controlling crime in our country. There might be equivalent opportunities in all the States of our Nation.
I am also aware of how good your own experience in distributive education pays off in your own life. Ninety percent of all the distributive education students go on beyond high school to a higher education. I wish this was the case with all students in our country; it's not. And so you've set an example in that respect as well and give your own present life and your own future families an opportunity that you wouldn't otherwise have, not just to make a higher income but to have a life that's more exciting, more challenging, more compatible with the finest aspects of our country.
HARRY A. APPLEGATE. Mr. President, ever since Congress created attention to this instructional phase of education, we believe we have met the challenge with a very successful program. But the uniqueness of it has been our insistence on cooperation and placement with the private sector. We continue a national advisory board, which consists of representatives of some 60 major corporations in the Nation, and we continue a congressional advisory board, with some 30 Members of the Senate and the House, continuing to help guide and direct us in that effort.
I'm extremely proud of the Latin heritage that's been brought to our own country. It's a benefit to American people. And our emphases on bilingual education comes from the heart. And I hope that that particular heritage or background can be preserved, because we can benefit a great deal from the extremely stable family configuration that exists among Latin American people—better by far on the average than what exists among Anglo-American families, perhaps—and the deep feelings of religious commitment are very admirable. The commitment to the work ethic is admirable.
In preparation for the previous meeting that I had with your group in the Roosevelt Room in the West Wing, I went back and studied some of the history of the Armenian people. And I, again, am impressed with the tremendous contribution that you've made to our own Nation, the high examples that you've set in leadership, in music, arts, in business, in politics, in education, and in your sound political judgment in choosing to be Democrats— [laughter] —also in your very early support of me when I ran for President. Yours was the first group that had confidence in me, and I will always remember it. And your help for our party and our country is something that I appreciate very much.
Note: The President spoke at 4:33 p.m. at the reception held for Armenian American leaders of business, labor, educational, civic, and religious organizations in the East Room at the White House.
In addition, the organization that produces these library facilities for blind people award scholarships each year for outstanding students who want to continue their education, who happen to be blind.
And the last point that I'd like to make that is a major responsibility of yours that I recognize very clearly, is that of public education. I think there are a lot of misapprehensions about energy of all kinds, in particular, nuclear fuels.
It is his love for people that has made it possible for him to keep the common touch, though he holds the Nation's highest office. His conviction and his compassion lead to commitment. All his life he has been committed to excellence. We see it in the brilliance of his intellectual achievement. We see it in his enthusiasm for his Presidential Scholars program. We see it in his true devotion to great music and art. We see it in the prodigious effort and inspiration he has given and is giving to improve education and government on the State level, and now on the national level. He is a man committed to the enhancement of the quality of every human being.
I just feel very deeply that you've honored me by coming, and you've honored our Nation by showing your superb achievements already at the young and early stage of your life. But you're also lucky, and you shouldn't take this recognition of achievement as an end in itself. You're fortunate because you had an access to books and to a good education program. You're fortunate that you had a President 15 years ago who believed very deeply in education himself. He didn't go naturally from high school directly into college. He had to work. He got his education, to a major degree, because of his own ability to earn an academic scholarship. He came to the White House by a torturous and difficult route. But when he got here as a former teacher himself, he knew the advantage of a good educational system.
It's a great pleasure for me to welcome you here to the White House, the center of our Government, and to let you know that I not only congratulate you on your achievement so far, but I expect great things from you in the future. You've been blessed with superior intelligence and opportunity not only because the Nation in which you happen to live provides freedom to express yourselves as individuals, but you've also been honored by your fellow Americans. And I hope you will accept this honor today as an additional instigation to achieve even more in the future and to recognize those who are not so fortunate as you, who haven't been blessed with a good educational opportunity or a sound, stable family life or a freedom to explore new dimensions of one's mind and one's heart.
This is a plaque which you can see, I think, clearly, a picture of the White House where President Johnson lived. "Presented by President Jimmy Carter in honor of the contributions to education by President Lyndon Baines Johnson on the 15th anniversary of the Presidential Scholars Program. The White House, May 25, 1978
LYNDA JOHNSON ROBB. I know my father would be very proud of all of you. The thing he was the most proud of was the young people of this country and the education, the opportunities that they had and what he expected from all of us. I know he'd be very happy to be honored today in the ceremony such as this. I don't expect to come back here 15 years later, again, 15 years from now as a parent of one of these Presidential Scholars, but I feel like a child of the program in many other ways, having been here when it was born 15 years ago.
Thank you so much.
I'm extremely proud of the Latin heritage that's been brought to our own country. It's a benefit to American people. And our emphases on bilingual education comes from the heart. And I hope that that particular heritage or background can be preserved, because we can benefit a great deal from the extremely stable family configuration that exists among Latin American people—better by far on the average than what exists among Anglo-American families, perhaps—and the deep feelings of religious commitment are very admirable. The commitment to the work ethic is admirable.
The Federal Government can also set a limit on how much unnecessary regulation costs on the inflation rate. Airline deregulation has been a good example of that. We are trying to get industry and labor to cooperate. But you have to remember that we have very fine special interest groups, each one of which wants everybody else to control inflation. Everybody wants to build water projects. The veterans want more payments. Farmers want higher prices. We want to have as much increase in wages among labor unions. Business doesn't want to have their own profit margins or prices constrained. Teachers want more money for education, and so forth.
My guess is that these focused Federal programs that are already on the books and already financed, the comprehensive education training programs, local public works, and so forth, can now be focused much more accurately upon those minority citizens who have not yet benefited, because they are ordinarily the last ones hired and the first ones fired. And as the general economy improves, that competition for scarce jobs goes down, and the Federal programs, which I hope will be temporary and not needed in the future, can be channeled much more accurately to the people about whom you asked.
Thank you.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you know, I don't want to predict exactly what's going to happen. My belief is that the American standard of living can continue to go up, that the standard of living, however, is not measured simply by the rate of growth of our national product. I think the standard of living is determined by many things: the assurance of peace, stability, the strength of families, the quality of education, the enhancement of basic human rights, harmony among dissident groups.
Our concern does not end the question of citizenship. No matter how concerned we are, we still have the problem. Unemployment among Hispanic young people is unacceptably high. The Hispanic worker, whether part-time or full-time, is twice as likely as other workers to earn an income below the poverty line. This is a problem of opportunity—of education and training, of bilingual programs that must meet the real needs of young people who will have to cope in a society where the majority speaks a different language.
The record increase in Federal funding for education, particularly programs for disadvantaged youngsters to help them master basic skills, will help to guarantee that the young people who will enter the workforce of the future will not be considering inadequate preparation as a barrier as often as they do today. Our young people are our most valuable resource. They cannot wait a generation for slow change. They need their chance now.
Ed Royhal and his colleagues—Bob Garcia, Baltasar Corrada, and Kika de la Garza, and others who have joined the Spanish Caucus—have made their voices heard far beyond their own districts. They've fought for the rights of all Hispanic Americans, whether their background is Mexican or Cuban Puerto Rican, Central American, or South American. They've fought for jobs, for political participation, for better education, and for an end to prejudice, discrimination, and bigotry.
With your help, we've increased funds for bilingual education already, in just a little over 2 years by 50 percent. And I've requested funds for a special program for bilingual vocational education. And I strongly support, by the way, the legislation which has already passed the Senate to give the Southwest Border Commission authority to award construction grants to ease severe overcrowding in schools in the Southwest, in heavily Hispanic areas.
Freedom, the attention given to an individual human being, a good education system, a benevolent attitude toward the world, a commitment to human rights, principles that don't change, a deep moral and ethical commitment, and the tapping of the resources of a free enterprise system, a democratic government, bountiful, natural blessings, with just a slight tinge now of restraint on energy—all these things bode well for our country in the future.
My opinion is that the best way to ensure that the cities will continue to improve is to orient not just special programs designed for the cities but all programs-in transportation, education, health, and environmental quality, jobs, housing—to orient those toward the deteriorating areas of our country as a top priority. This means some shift in past policy compared to what was the attitude of previous administrations. And I think we again have the strong support of local governments.
Let me say this, in closing, to you: Your influence in this country, I think, is probably underestimated, even by the members of the League of Women Voters. Quite often, because of the tremendous diversity of responsibilities on a Member of the House of Representatives or the U.S. Senate or a President, there's not enough time to address every individual issue in a definitive and a deep way. And in your own subcommittee work, in education and housing and transportation and environmental quality, in health, those kinds of issues can be more deeply understood by you.
And there is nothing more effective, in my judgment, than to have a small group from the League ask for and receive an appointment with a Member of the Senate or House, particularly when they are home on a weekend or on a temporary vacation, and just say, "I want to talk to you for a few minutes about health or children or education."
Today, I want to recognize an entire group of people, some of whom were never singled out individually for fame or for recognition, but who mean just as much to our country. We have great strength in our Nation—our agricultural productivity, our energy supplies, enormous educational system, technological advances—but our greatest strength, as you know, lies in the dynamism of America's people.
I would not want to see our Nation, coincidentally, or parenthetically, become a two-language nation. You've seen what happened in Canada between the French and British-speaking people. And my hope and my expectation and my policy as President is to provide bilingual education, but to assure within the bounds of my authority and my influence that the Spanish-speaking people who come into our country ultimately learn how to speak English and become American citizens the same as everyone else. I might say that I hope that their families will also continue to know how to speak Spanish. My wife and I study Spanish, and we encourage our children to learn Spanish, because it is becoming a very important language throughout the world.
I think I know well, much better than 3 1/2 years ago, the special problems of those who don't speak English well when they first come to this country. Our Nation has experience that well qualifies us to deal with that new evolution in the life of a person seeking a better life. And I'm also aware of the great contributions in science, art, culture, education, medicine, politics, the Nobel Prize winners, who represent the Hispanic culture so well.
The Congress, along with me, has increased the allocation of Federal funds for education in just a short period of 3 years by 73 percent. We've now been able to form a new Department of Education that can focus special attention, undeviating attention on the special needs of those who are searching to broaden their minds and to open their hearts. Our Secretary of Education is here today, Shirley Hufstedler, who's particularly eager to see special programs enhanced. We've already increased bilingual education funds, for instance, by 117 percent. And we're not through yet.
Next week we'll send to the FEDERAL REGISTER new regulations on bilingual education dealing with a sensitive issue. Those regulations will be published in the FEDERAL REGISTER, and we want all of you to participate, along with Secretary Hufstedler, in evolving them in a better way for your own families and your friends and those whom you represent.
Before assuming his new duties, he was director of the California State Office of Economic Opportunity and his background ranges from working with juvenile offenders to employment development to multicultural and educational programs at the college level.
I'm committed to securing for all children in America an equal chance to learn and to excel. There's a saying in Spanish, "Negar la educacion a nuestros ninos es la ruina de las naciones." [To deny education to our children is the ruin of nations.] And if we deny a good education to our children, it could bring about the ruin of the Nation we love. We've increased Federal support for education, leaving control of our schools at the local and State level where it ought to be. We've greatly increased bilingual education, more than double since I've been in office, because we know that too many children, as they learn English, must also be able to learn other subjects at the same time.
THE PRESIDENT. As you know, the other border States at this time provide education for the undocumented alien children, undocumented worker-children. This is a matter that is in the Federal courts. It would not be proper for me as President, because of the separation between the Executive and the judiciary, to involve myself in it. The State government, which has a substantial surplus which we don't yet enjoy in the Federal Government, has maintained that impact aid should be given to the Texas schools. This is not legal and will not be done, because impact aid is designed for communities that have extra costs in their school systems because of military bases and other Federal installations, and not because the State government happens to disagree with the Federal Government on an issue.
So the responsibility as presently expressed by the Supreme Court of the United States is that education must be provided for the undocumented worker-children, and I don't believe there's any possibility for impact aid from the Federal Government. The other States are complying with this ruling, and I feel sure that Texas will do the same since the courts have ruled.
Thank you.
So I think that you, as a bright young man, ought to do everything you can to make sure that there's equal opportunity for all the children, regardless of their race or how much their parents are worth in money, and that there's a good quality education for everybody and that people have a maximum chance to do what they wish, to go to the school of their own choice.
In addition to that, we will have in the future a constantly expanding commitment by the Federal Government to education, both private and public, with the new Department of Education. In the past, the education programs have been buried underneath welfare and health. There has not been a single person in Washington where your parents or a school board member or a Governor could go and say, "We've got a problem," with private or public education, preschool, grammar school, high school, or college. "What can you do about it?" Now, Secretary Shirley Hufstedler is the new Secretary of a brand new Department of Education.
Also, before we get any further, I represent the educational—[inaudible]—of Indian affairs. Indian discrimination—[inaudible]—Indian, and I know it still stands in Indian schools and Indian hospitals. I stand for their chiefs, for the chiefs' document, with Dr. Hector P. Garcia, for the education of anybody that can't afford it. Forty percent Federal aided—[inaudible]—for the people of the United States of America. I believe that our President is for the people, all people, the poor. It doesn't make any difference.
Education's a new Department, a burning issue in the Hispanic-American community. We have a deep commitment to bilingual education, as you know, and a wonderful Secretary of Education. But the Assistant Secretary at the Department of Education—John Gabusi, and I'm very grateful for him.
Another significant feature of this act will help Florida communities. It's a 3-year program of grants to States to help local education agencies meet the needs of Cuban and Haitian adults and children. The bill also authorizes aid to school districts greatly affected by the influx of children from Indochina.
I believe this Department now is as efficient as its ever been. We had a very confused Department up until about a year or so ago with health and welfare and education in the same Department. We've taken education out now, and the reason we've done that is so that education can stand on its own so that local people, State officials, school board members, parents, when they have a problem with the schools that might wind up in the courts will now know one Cabinet officer to go to to get an answer to a question or try to resolve a problem before the Federal courts stick their nose in local peoples' business.
Could you please create what we in education call a behavioral objective, that is, one: State a specific economic problem that you wanted to address yourself to 4 years ago. Two: List the steps you took to remediate that problem. And three: Tell what changes you have observed which you think indicate you have been successful.
Mr. Reagan has referred to the fact that an arms race might be advisable, and he has also said, as you know, that he was going to play a card of an arms race to force the Soviets to do this or that. A nuclear war would be the worst thing. It would make energy and economics and education and caring for the elderly and trade insignificant as an issue. That is a very serious matter.
After 4 years of practical experience, I'm more convinced than ever that the future we desire lies in recognizing yearnings that are common to individuals and to nations alike. As individuals the peoples of the Americas yearn for basic human rights; they desire personal liberty, to be free from torture and arbitrary arrest, to participate in making the basic decisions that shape their own future, to have adequate food, health care, and education. And as part of the global community, every nation of the Americas has a desire and a right to help shape the future, not only of our own hemisphere but indeed the entire world.
I think it's accurate to say that Secretary of HEW Califano agrees with me completely. And we are trying to make it possible for the people of this Nation to understand how to prevent unwanted pregnancies with education programs and with the availability of contraceptives and other devices, when they believe in their use, as an alternative to abortion. But I don't believe that either States or the Federal Government should be required to finance abortions.
So, I believe that time and education and knowledge about the treaties will lead to increasing support in the Senate. So, I have confidence that the Senate will ratify when the vote does come.
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Our hope has been and our goal has been to work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular and to encourage South Africa to move toward the elimination of some of those racial problems which they've had historically, to do away with apartheid, to give an equal opportunity for employment, job promotion, education, and the participation in the political and economic affairs of South Africa for all its citizens.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Palestinians have rights, as I described in my United Nations speech, as do all human beings. The Palestinians are one major group of refugees that have been created in the Mideast. Obviously, there are Jewish refugees also. But I think all human beings have the same basic yearning for freedom, for human self-respect, for a home in which they can live, for a right to raise a family, to have education, health care, food. So, I would say in that respect they have the same rights as others do.
Last quarter, about $3 billion of that program was in effect. By the end of this quarter, $18 billion will be in effect and, in the first quarter of next year, the full amount. We believe that this will have a beneficial impact on unemployment rates, but it certainly won't solve the problem. We will by next June, for instance, have 725,000 jobs under the comprehensive education and training program. This is the highest level for jobs of this category supported directly by the Federal Government since the New Deal days under Roosevelt.
Food stamp reform, which was accomplished last year, is one example. We'll have a substantial increase in the allotment of funds for housing, for urban development, for education, for transportation, for providing jobs for those who are currently unemployed. And I think we've brought back a great deal of the balance that ought to exist between the downtown, sometimes deteriorating urban centers on the one hand, and the suburban areas on the other.
We are trying to rebuild both the interest at the local community level and also the Federal Government involvement in the downtown urban areas which, I think, had been to some degree neglected. Quite often the Congress would design a program in the past for the more rapidly deteriorating, more needy parts of the country, but because of the better organization, higher level of education and public awareness, higher degree of political influence, the suburbs, completely legally, would get most of the benefits of those programs. We are trying to provide a better balance now.
In a separate written message to Congress, I've outlined other domestic initiatives, such as welfare reform, consumer protection, basic education skills, urban policy, reform of our labor laws, and national health care later on this year. I will not repeat these tonight. But there are several other points that I would like to make directly to you.
One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as passionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose children have a far smaller chance for good health or food or education or human fulfillment than a child born in this country.
But there's an historic commitment among many Members of Congress to support the B-1 program, but that's the present holdup on additional help. But I think whenever we have expanded allocations of funds for education or for transportation or for housing, to some degree it relieves the local governments of a financial burden that they can then channel into special needs, obviously including drinking water in the Chicago area.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think they are justified. I have taken a different philosophy from some of my predecessors in trying to concentrate Federal program funds in the most intensely needful areas. I think in the past there has been a tendency—for instance, in housing, just to use one example, where money is allocated by the Congress with the intention of helping the most destitute regions—that the money is channeled out into the more affluent suburban areas because of the higher educational level, the better organizational structure, the more effective political presentation to program administrators and, quite often, also to a better understanding of what the Federal programs offer.
And the second thing is to ensure that the State legislatures and State boards of regents in the predominantly black colleges didn't give them a lower level of physical and educational service as contrasted with the white colleges.
He's had a special responsibility also in career education, which is important to me as a person who's had to work all my life. And I come from a part of the country that's very poor; many parts of Maine are very poor.
Those who grow crops under the ground have something in common. We don't make much money. [Laughter] And a lot of our children don't have a chance to get an advanced education and career education. And the matching of the graduates of our vocational schools, high schools, technical schools, with the job opportunities has been the special province in the United States Senate of Senator Bill Hathaway. And he's the author of that legislation that I signed into law this past December.
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't favor tuition tax credits under any circumstance, even if it was at a very slight level, because this would inevitably rapidly grow with each succeeding budget; and the first thing that you know, tuition tax credits would be the major Federal expenditure for all education in the United States. And so, I think that tuition tax credits itself, as a subject, is very detrimental to the future of education in our country.
There will be some indirect impact on the Federal Government now and more direct influence in the future, because there's no doubt about the fact that unemployment will go up in California, as government workers are laid off because of stringent budget requirements. And, of course, our unemployment compensation payments will have to increase. Also, I think we have about 50,000 CETA jobs, comprehensive education training administration jobs worked out jointly with local governments. Many of those may be in danger.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, within the constraints of the presently existing programs for transportation, education, for air and water pollution control, crime control, and the LEAA, CETA jobs for public service and training, of course we would be glad to help the communities of California on the same basis as we help the communities around the country. And if there should evolve a crisis in a community, after careful assessment, within the bounds of the law and administrative procedures, we would obviously help them.
Two years ago I promised the American people that we would revitalize our educational system and to focus the attention of it on the poor and the deprived children who haven't had an adequate chance in life, whose parents perhaps are illiterate and haven't had the will or the motivation or the vision to inspire those little kids. Even compared to the halcyon days of Lyndon Johnson, the Congress has voted the largest increases in funds for school and education in history, and it's focused accurately on those who need it most.
And you ought to realize that we have cut the budget deficit, given jobs, better education, strengthened our defenses. At the same time, last year we had a multibillion dollar tax cut, and we have on schedule now another tax cut for the American people of about $20 billion. That is the kind of fiscal responsibility that American people deserve, to meet our people's needs while balancing the Nation's books.
It's not callous nor hardhearted for a government to deliver food to a hungry person without waste, with efficiency. It's not callous nor hardhearted management to give our children a better education without waste, and efficiently.
THE PRESIDENT. One of the most gratifying things that has happened since I've been in the White House as President has been the evolution of a good, cooperative partnership arrangement with you. As we've prepared major programs of all kinds, involving health or education, involving transportation, environmental quality, we've tried to work very closely with the officials who represent the cities of our country. This has been especially true as we evolved the urban policy that's now the basis for programs that we are implementing, either through Executive action or through legislative processes. I hope that this can continue, and I certainly expect it to continue.
So, as I make decisions on domestic affairs, not only including direct aid and programs to cities but also the more general ones involving welfare, health, education, transportation, nothing could benefit me more than to have your direct input. So, I would say, through my domestic staff, Stu Eizenstat, Jack Watson, more particularly, and the Office of Management and Budget, and directly With me—through all those mechanisms—we are very eager to have your input.
This year, we must extend major reorganization efforts to education, to economic development, and to the management of our natural resources. We need to enact a sunshine [sunset] law that when government programs have outlived their value, they will automatically be terminated.
You can help a great deal. I might say we have done it in the spirit of my own political party. I know many of you are Republicans; many of you are Democrats. But we've never neglected the effort to put people back to work, to provide jobs, to encourage better education, better transportation, better health care, better attention given to the very poor, to the elderly. We've not neglected those things. Most of the achievements in reducing the deficit have been because of greater efficiency, establishment of proper priorities, zerobased budgeting, and the cooperative spirit both in the special interest groups, mostly highly benevolent, and the Congress working with us.
You've been a part of this.
Without a vigorous economic system, we cannot assure the adequacy of our national security. We cannot provide sufficiently for the poor and the aged and the infirm and the veterans who have served this country. We cannot revitalize our cities. We cannot guarantee proper shelter or education or medical care for all Americans. We will be handicapped in maintaining American leadership in a fragile world.
And I think the opportunity for me to go throughout the Nation and for the Cabinet officers and the Vice President and members of my family and others who are interested and tell the record of what we've done and what we anticipate doing for the next 4 years is an excellent opportunity. It'll be an educational process;it'll give us a chance to learn about problems that we haven't solved and ideas we hadn't thought about. and to realize the programs that are successful and those that are not successful.
The third thing is this: We've had tremendous improvements or increases since I've been in office in helping the life of those who are poor. I've already mentioned employment opportunities that have increased, housing has been extremely high. We've also had commitments made to education. For instance, we have increased, just the first 2 years I was in office, the Federal allocation of funds for education by 60 percent. And I would almost say flatly—there may be a few exceptions—that now if a young person reaches college age, if that person is motivated and is educationally qualified, that young person can go to college because we've expanded those opportunities so greatly.
We will continue to meet our Nation's needs in education, in health, in housing, better cities, transportation, agriculture, with efficiency and with carefully managed programs, not with wasteful bureaucracy, not with gimmicks.
He's long believed in giving our young people the best education that this country can offer. This affair tonight is a vivid demonstration of that commitment. In the last 3 years since Tip O'Neill has been Speaker, Federal aid to education has increased by 60 percent, and now we have a new Department of Education to focus ever more attention on this integral part of America's present and its future. And Tip O'Neill deserves much of the credit. That's Tip O'Neill, Democratic Party government, and I'm proud to be part of it.
We must have a long-range, balanced approach to the allocation of Federal expenditures. We will continue to meet such crucial needs, of course, as jobs and housing and education and health, but we must realize that a prerequisite to the enjoyment of such progress is to assure peace for our Nation. So, in asking congressional support for our defense efforts, I'm asking for consistent support, steadfast support—not just for 1980 or 1981, but until these commitments have been fulfilled.
Our Nation is so strong and we are so blessed that sometimes we forget those two basic facts. We've got four times as much energy in this country in reserve as all the OPEC nations combined. And with the innovation and the confidence, the educational level, the capital reserves, the freedom that enhances the contribution of each person in our country, we have a chance to change and to improve the American way of living so that we can go through this temporary inconvenience and transient disappointment time and come out not weaker, but stronger. That's my responsibility as President. It's a responsibility of the leaders like Charlie Duncan, who work with me in the Cabinet; it's the responsibility of the Congress, as you well know; it's also a responsibility of all of you.
As we enter our heaviest driving season of the year, I call on all members of the private and the public sectors to encourage ridesharing and transit use, promote better driver efficiency, and to inform the public, through various means of education and promotion and advertisement, of the methods and the advantages of conservation.
The Congress, however, has added on top of that additional spending at the expense of domestic programs. And as we go through this time of recession which is now on us, we really need to have programs designed to keep Americans at work and to meet the needs of education, training, and the prevention of deterioration in our most severely impacted cities and communities around the Nation. We cannot afford to cheat the American people on domestic programs with an unnecessary allocation of funds from domestic programs to defense expenditures.
I think that our administration has accurately represented the basic concepts and principles of the Democratic Party. We've had extraordinary improvements in those facets of American life that are particularly valuable to those who suffer most from deprivation historically. We've added 9 million new jobs to the American economy; a million of those are among blacks, a substantial number, of course, are among Hispanics and other minority groups. We've had an unprecedented increase in education, and I think we've got a good urban program. So, I think as far as our record in the past is concerned and the judgment of Democratic voters throughout the country this year, that claim that we don't accurately represent the party is inaccurate.
THE PRESIDENT. —and during the times of Governors' meetings, many of us would work very hard for programs concerning education and programs concerning agriculture and environmental quality and trade. Governor Reagan was one who would come into a meeting without doing the long, tedious work in which most of us were involved, would call a press conference and, because of his fame, would attract a great deal of press attention and then he would be gone. That's, I believe, the only thing that I ever criticized about Governor Reagan.
You asked for new programs on city parks and recreation and Community Development Block Grants. We put them into effect. We've expanded Federal aid to education by 75 percent, and we've targeted the neediest school districts, and there's hardly a college-age child now in this Nation who's qualified to do college work that cannot have a college education financed by some means. We've committed $50 billion in this current decade for urban mass transit, more than three times the amount that was spent in the 1970's.
I'm also proud because you represent America at its very best. The heart of our democracy, as you well know, is universal, strong, free, public education, and the heart of that system— [applause] and the heart of that education system is the teacher. The simple truth is that the more complex and difficult our national issues become, the more valuable to America is an educated public.
When we began our partnership in 1977—as a matter of fact, we actually began our partnership about a year earlier-we had gone through two administrations that were hostile to the .American education programs that you worked so hard over the last number of years to enact. The result of this was an actual decline, in real terms, in support of education, during 8 years of serious and growing need.
A quick look at the record will be very helpful to us. I would like to look at the facts with you. Working together, you and I have reversed that downward trend. Compared to the budget proposal which I inherited when I was inaugurated as President in 1977—and which I immediately changed—the 1981 budget will have increased Federal funds for education by 73 percent. We've had some good administrations in Washington in the past, but this is the greatest increase in any such period in the history of our Nation, and we're not through yet.
We've increased title I by 55 percent. For the handicapped Americans, we have tripled State grants. For bilingual education, we have doubled funding. And throughout the country, we've established centers where teachers can upgrade their skills. With expanded college aid for middle-income families, as well as for impoverished students, overall student aid has more than doubled. And now for the first time in the history of our Nation, there is no need for any young person in America to miss a college education because of financial reasons.
And as Willard McGuire has already mentioned, there is now a chair in the Cabinet Room next to the Oval Office, and it's marked on it, "Secretary of Education." And we have a distinguished Californian who sits there, Secretary Shirley Hufstedler. Later on she'll be addressing this convention, and she'll go into more detail about specific programs on which we will be cooperating in the months and years ahead. But from now on, education will have a strong voice at every Cabinet meeting. The children, the parents, and the teachers of America will be well represented, and you can depend on that.
At the same time, all our people in this country, including you and me, are rightly concerned that many of our children do not yet learn to read and write, that schools and classrooms are sometimes disorderly, that good teachers are becoming disenchanted, and that administration of our schools is often haphazard and wasteful. Whatever the reasons— [applause] —I was interested in seeing when you would applaud on that line. [Laughter] Whatever the reasons for these acknowledged problems, the answer does not lie in dismantling Federal programs, in taxpayer revolts, or in chastising the teachers in the classroom. The answer lies in more and better education, not only as a commitment to our children but as a commitment to our Nation.
That's why I've submitted to the Congress this year a $2-billion drive to establish a permanent youth employment program. This will bring the total to $6 billion for an effort that enlists educators and others in providing basic skills and jobs to the disadvantaged young people. That legislation is making good progress, but I need the help of every member of NEA and all friends of education in getting it passed through the Congress.
Equally important, in a world that is increasingly interdependent and when exports have become so critical to our economic health, our young people have less foreign language capacity than they did 10 years ago. Our schools are deemphasizing foreign language studies. All of these trends must be reversed.
I'm also concerned about working conditions for teachers, and I'm concerned about the fundamental role of collective bargaining. As I've said before, and I'd like to repeat, the quality of education depends first and foremost on the morale and the effectiveness of the classroom teacher.
I've authorized an interagency study, that will report to me, of how teachers' salaries and conditions affect the quality of education and what governments can do in a proper and legitimate way, at all levels, so that we can have constructive alternatives to strikes and to work stoppages by meeting the legitimate needs and requirements of the teachers of this country.
In summary, I'd like to say that for the last 3 1/2 years we've worked for education programs to give even the poorest child the chance to learn, a chance to dream, a chance to succeed. We've worked for programs that prepare our young people and our Nation for the great challenges that we face in this century and in the century not too far away.
The most recent example of the simplistic approach to serious issues, one that I'm having to fight every day in Washington, is the effort now in Congress to stick onto totally unrelated bills, without any public hearings, proposals which would lead to a 30-percent across-the-board tax cut over the next 3 years. By 1985, this would cost us $280 billion annually. It would reward the wealthy. It would mean a wholesale retreat from the painful progress that we've made over the last several months to reduce inflation and reduce interest rates. It is sheer deception to promise the American people that we can have this enormously expensive and unfair tax cut, that we can dramatically increase defense expenditures even above and beyond the substantial levels I've recommended, and that we can sustain our programs in education, employment, health, and other areas, and that we can exercise budget restraint at the same time.
And I call on you today to reaffirm our joint commitment to the realization of our principles, which we share in action. We must choose in this decade a new partnership of government and the private sector that builds for the future. We can only do this if we invest heavily in our most precious possession, our human capital, through education.
In you, the members of NEA, I see the spirit of building, the spirit of pulling together. I see a renewal of our dedication to children and to their education. I see our capacity and the opportunity for lasting solutions to even our most serious and difficult problems. When later generations look back, I want them to see us, you and me, as the people who did build for the future and who left as a legacy, a strong education system in a strong and great nation. Together, we will realize that dream.
Thank you very much.
I see a future of justice—the justice of good jobs, decent health care, quality education, a full opportunity for all people regardless of color or language or religion; the simple human justice of equal rights for all men and for all women, guaranteed equal rights at last under the Constitution of the United States of America.
In their fantasy America, inner-city people and farm workers and laborers do not exist. Women, like children, are to be seen but not heard. The problems of working women are simply ignored. The elderly do not need Medicare. The young do not need more help in getting a better education. Workers do not require the guarantee of a healthy and a safe place to work. In their fantasy world, all the complex global changes of the world since World War II have never happened. In their fantasy America, all problems have simple solutions—simple and wrong.
Along with this gigantic tax cut, the new Republican leaders promise to protect retirement and health programs and to have massive increases in defense spending-and they claim they can balance the budget. If they are serious about these promises, and they say they are, then a close analysis shows that the entire rest of the Government would have to be abolished, everything from education to farm programs, from the G.I. bill to the night watchman at the Lincoln Memorial—and their budget would still be in the red. The only alternative would be to build more printing presses to print cheap money. Either way, the American people lose. But the American people will not stand for it.
These kinds of measures stimulate business, but it cannot help a community when it's already in financial distress. When a community cannot maintain police, fire, education, sanitation services, it loses both its old industry, and it cannot hope to get new industry. In order to help communities like this maintain the services necessary to promote development, I'll propose countercyclical revenue-sharing at a level of $1 billion in 1981.
What is necessary under the American law and the Constitution is that if the school boards and the parents and the teachers cannot come up with a way to treat the minority students fairly and equitably and give them equal quality of education, then the courts move in as a last resort and mandate that students be bused to one another's schools. That's a last resort that ought to be avoided. And in my judgement, the best thing that parents and teachers and others can do to avoid the injection of the Federal courts into the situation is to guarantee equality of opportunity in the school systems as they exist.
