So, there has to be some way to deal with those that are already here. I think the third thing that we need to do is to make it difficult, if not illegal, for an employer to encourage the illegal workers to come into this country and then not pay them fair wages, and also not pay the standard deductions for unemployment compensation, workmen's compensation, and social security. But it's a complicated question. It's a very sensitive question. If it wasn't, it would have been solved before. But my inclination is to try to do what we can to stop the large flood of immigrations coming in; secondly, to let some of those who've been here for a number of years have an opportunity to become American citizens and make it much more unattractive for employers to encourage undocumented workers to come in for employment.
So, there has to be some way to deal with those that are already here. I think the third thing that we need to do is to make it difficult, if not illegal, for an employer to encourage the illegal workers to come into this country and then not pay them fair wages, and also not pay the standard deductions for unemployment compensation, workmen's compensation, and social security. But it's a complicated question. It's a very sensitive question. If it wasn't, it would have been solved before. But my inclination is to try to do what we can to stop the large flood of immigrations coming in; secondly, to let some of those who've been here for a number of years have an opportunity to become American citizens and make it much more unattractive for employers to encourage undocumented workers to come in for employment.
This kind of harassment must stop, and my administration, working with you, will do what it can to see that it does. Moreover, we've submitted legislation to Congress now which will stop the flow of illegal immigration while fully protecting the rights of our Hispanic citizens.
What I think we ought to do is to have a legal arrangement, new laws passed by the Congress, that would deal effectively with the problem of illegal immigration. We want to be very careful that all the 20 million Mexican Americans who live here, plus even those who have come into our country in contravention of the law, are treated with respect and treated fairly.
So, there has to be some way to deal with those that are already here. I think the third thing that we need to do is to make it difficult, if not illegal, for an employer to encourage the illegal workers to come into this country and then not pay them fair wages, and also not pay the standard deductions for unemployment compensation, workmen's compensation, and social security. But it's a complicated question. It's a very sensitive question. If it wasn't, it would have been solved before. But my inclination is to try to do what we can to stop the large flood of immigrations coming in; secondly, to let some of those who've been here for a number of years have an opportunity to become American citizens and make it much more unattractive for employers to encourage undocumented workers to come in for employment.
He'll be in charge of naturalization and immigration, and he's the kind of person, I think, that can bring a proper sensitivity to the special challenge which too long has remained unresolved--how to welcome those who legally and properly should come to our society, come into our great country; how to deal with those who have in the past come into our country illegally, but who perform well here; and how to establish and maintain a friendly, constant working relationship with our friends and neighbors who want to have a good, close contact with their own loved ones in this country and who want to come here to provide good services for our country.
This kind of harassment must stop, and my administration, working with you, will do what it can to see that it does. Moreover, we've submitted legislation to Congress now which will stop the flow of illegal immigration while fully protecting the rights of our Hispanic citizens.
We're dealing with some of the sensitive human issues, immigration, naturalization laws. The man in charge of this, Leonel Castillo, happens to be a Texan.
What I think we ought to do is to have a legal arrangement, new laws passed by the Congress, that would deal effectively with the problem of illegal immigration. We want to be very careful that all the 20 million Mexican Americans who live here, plus even those who have come into our country in contravention of the law, are treated with respect and treated fairly.
In some ways, the immigration laws that we now have in effect have not been workable, and I have submitted to the last Congress proposals for change in those immigration laws. The Congress did not act on my proposals. Before I decide whether or not to submit new laws to Congress or what form they should take, I want to consult very closely with President Lopez Portillo and other interested Mexican officials so that when we do change our law, it will be one that will be fair and workable and will protect the interests and the basic human rights of even those who have come to our country in the past in violation of our immigration laws.
As President, I am responsible for upholding the laws of my country, including its immigration laws. I will meet that responsibility as fairly and as humanely as I can. My consultations held here will help me to make the right decisions. I am deeply and personally determined to protect the basic human rights of all people within the borders of my country whether or not they are citizens of the United States.
Each of us, as leaders, has a primary responsibility to represent the interests of our own people. Naturally, this leads to differences in perspective and differences of opinion as we do discuss complicated issues. Our discussions on this visit have been very productive. And we now have an even better prospect of resolving those inevitable differences which have sometimes been obstacles to further progress for many generations. We know that questions involving energy, trade, immigration, transportation, and fisheries are not easy to answer. But we are determined, working together, to succeed.
When I was in Mexico recently, I discussed this matter with President Lopez Portillo and other members of the Mexican Government and have now set up an immigration commission, which will be headed by Governor Reubin Askew from Florida. Governor Askew will add his own judgment and his results of consultations to my own and make a recommendation on a permanent solution, we hope, to this problem, that will be satisfactory.
Leonel Castillo, a Mexican American, as you know, who's director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, is trying to bring an incredibly antiquated immigration service into modern times. When we came into office, he found a situation where it was impossible to call the Los Angeles service of the immigration, because all the lines were always busy. Letters were lost in rooms piled high with unopened mail. The only hope of communicating with the immigration office 2 years ago was to come in person and to stand in line. He found people getting in line at midnight just to make an appointment to stand in line at a later time. Often that next appointment was months away.
For too long both the legislative and the executive branches of Government have ignored our immigration policies and the problems that were building up throughout our land. Undocumented aliens have feared that any solution attempted would be at their expense, and a great many other people have just found it easier not to think about this problem as long as it was others who suffered and not themselves.
At the transit center, the refugee transit center in Bangkok, we saw overcrowded and humiliating conditions where refugees awaiting final processing for immigration must endure. These were things that I don't think I'll ever forget. These were people who have already been chosen to go to other countries and have to wait in an unbelievable place, some for a month and a half or 2 months. We try to process ours, the ones that are coming to the United States, much earlier, but still the conditions are unbearable.
Second, I've directed our immigration authorities to review the visas of some 50,000 Iranian students, who are guests here in our country. Our Nation is fully committed to the enhancement of human rights, the protection of legal rights, and the enhancement of civil justice. All provisions of the United States Constitution will be honored. All foreign nationals who are here lawfully may continue here with their work or their studies. But those who are here illegally will be processed promptly and lawfully for deportation back to their own country.
Second, tomorrow we will open a family registration center in Miami, and later perhaps in other communities, to begin receiving the names of people who are eligible for immigration to our Nation because they are close members of Cuban American families who have permanent residence here.
Third, the Coast Guard is now communicating with all boats who are en route to Cuba and those in Mariel Harbor in Cuba, to urge them to return to the United States without accepting additional passengers. No new trips to Cuba by these unauthorized boats should be started. Those who comply with this request or command will have nothing to fear from the law, but we will ensure that the law is obeyed. Persons who violate this requirement and who violate U.S. immigration custom laws by traveling to Cuba to pick up additional passengers will be subject to civil fines and to criminal prosecution. Furthermore, boats used to bring people unlawfully to this country will be seized. I have directed the various law enforcement agencies to take additional steps as necessary to assure that this policy and the law are obeyed.
We will continue to insist that the 362 Cubans in the U.S. Interest Section in Havana be allowed to depart for the United States immediately and that families be reunited and political prisoners be permitted to enter our country in complete accordance with our Nation's laws. We will not stand idly by while Castro willfully seeks to violate those laws or our immigration process.
So, we pledge our cooperation. We're sure, under your leadership, the necessary reforms that are needed in our immigration law will take place. And so we thank you very kindly for your words of encouragement.
When I was sworn in as President by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, I took an oath, a solemn oath, to uphold the Constitution of our country and to enforce its laws. A part of those laws are the immigration and naturalization laws, and it's my responsibility, at the Mexican border, the Canadian border, or the shorelines of our country, to restrict as much as possible illegal entry of persons to our country.
At Madrid, we will use the CSCE process to break down even more the barriers to human contacts between the East and the West, to help with the reunification of families, to help with the movement of people and ideas and the resolution of immigration issues.
And I think that one of the most complex and difficult issues which I face is that of immigration. Ours is a nation so great that it's attractive to those in foreign countries for various reasons: in some communist nations, just to escape personal prosecution and to find human freedom; in others, to join loved ones who've already come here; in other cases, to find a better life and a better opportunity economically. How to assimilate this influx of would-be American citizens and those who come here on a temporary basis and intend to return to their former home is a very difficult question, indeed.
And now I'd like to say something about Puerto Rico and why one of the great leaders of Puerto Rico decided not to speak to you tonight. It's not a pleasant thing, but it's one of the duties that I have as President. We've had in the last few months, 120,000 Cubans to come to our Nation, above and beyond the immigration quotas, above and beyond those permitted by the law. I've done the best I could, under one of the most difficult possible circumstances, to accommodate these newcomers to our Nation who came here seeking freedom.
This bill signing is important, not only to you but to this country, because this is not just a Florida problem, it's a Federal problem, it's a national problem. And I want to let you know this morning—as I have felt from the very beginning, constrained as I was by the law and by appropriations and by restraints of a bureaucracy that's not quick to move—that I assume the responsibility, as President, for the problem generated recently by the unexpected immigration from Cuba and particularly from Haiti as well.
So, we will, in accordance with American immigration laws, continue to strengthen ourselves with immigrants. And when there is a special unanticipated flood of refugees that nobody ever thought would take place, the Federal Government has acted to alleviate the financial burden on local people and on State governments. And we've done it very effectively in Florida. Florida, particularly, and other places, maybe like some in Toledo, have performed superbly. I'm very proud of the way Americans have reacted. Our country is not weakened because of it.
We can see a time when human rights are no longer threatened by the violence of either governments or terrorists and when every government responds to the will of its people expressed through democratic institutions. We can see a time when nations have cooperated, in the OAS and elsewhere, to develop just and fair ways of dealing with the migration of people, a time when no nation disregards the immigration laws of its neighbor and many nations offer a haven to the few who still need such a place to dwell.
When I was in Mexico recently, I discussed this matter with President Lopez Portillo and other members of the Mexican Government and have now set up an immigration commission, which will be headed by Governor Reubin Askew from Florida. Governor Askew will add his own judgment and his results of consultations to my own and make a recommendation on a permanent solution, we hope, to this problem, that will be satisfactory.
