But there is hope out there. In the West African countries of Senegal, Burkina Faso, and Guinea, hundreds of communities have pledged to end the practice of female genital cutting. Women who have been subjected to abuse and sexual assault, like Mukhtaran Mai of Pakistan, have turned their tragedies into an opportunity to create positive cultural change. These examples show that we can -- and we must -- bring this violence out of the shadows, and ensure that violence against women is treated as the crime that it is.
"As funding for the COPS program has gone down, crime has gone up," Clinton said. "By boosting funding for community policing we can put more cops on the beat and make our communities safer."
With crime rising in cities across America, Clinton said she would more than double funding for Community Oriented Policing Systems (COPS) to Clinton administration levels of more than $1 billion. President Bush's proposed budget slashes COPS funding by 94%, from $541 million in 2007 to $34 million in 2008, and provides no money to hire new police officers.
Since it was created, the COPS program has funded nearly 118,000 officers in more than 13,000 communities. Between 1994 and 2001, due in part to the COPS grants, violent crime declined by 26 percent and the murder rate fell by 34 percent. An October 2005 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report concluded that for every dollar spent on COPS hiring per resident, crime fell by almost 30 incidents per 100,000 residents.
"Senator Clinton is a tremendous supporter of the COPS program," Willis said. "The COPS program put more police on our streets, gave our officers the equipment they need, and in the long run, it made our communities safer. For the last six and a half years we've seen that program cut, year after year. And what has happened? Our crime rates across the country are going up. Senator Clinton will give local elected officials the tools they need to make our communities safer."
Next, let's deal with the rising crime rate, put more police back on the street, fund them with federal dollars. We need to make sure we have 21st century schools for New Orleans. We know there were serious problems before Katrina, and let's set the goal of making New Orleans schools the best in the country.
Miller, who has held several elected offices including Lieutenant Governor and Clark County District Attorney, is known for his leadership and advocacy for education, combating crime and protecting natural resources. During his tenure as governor, he was appointed by President Bill Clinton to the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.
Mayor Menino, currently serving his fourth term as the Mayor of Boston, is credited with working to provide every child with a quality education, create affordable housing, lower the crime rate, revitalize Boston's neighborhoods, and promote a healthy lifestyle for all city residents. As President of the United States Conference of Mayors from 2002-2003, he championed homeland security and housing availability.
Cicilline has made a name for himself as reform-minded mayor intent on modernizing city government and improving neighborhood schools. Under his leadership, Providence's crime rate has dropped to its lowest level in 30 years due to an innovative community policing program, and fiscal integrity has been restored as evidenced by straight-A bond ratings.
Dinkins, New York City's first African-American Mayor, served as the 106th Mayor of the City of New York from 1990 to 1994. Among his many accomplishments was the institution of the widely praised "Safe Streets, Safe City" program, which hired thousands of new police officers and began the decline of crime rates in New York City. He established a system of after-school youth centers, Beacon Schools, and opened several Community Health Centers. Dinkins also led the fight to divest the City's $500 million dollars in pension funds invested in companies that did business with apartheid South Africa and worked to create an all civilian Police Oversight Board to review misconduct complaints.
Prior to his election as mayor, Street served 20 years on the Philadelphia City Council and was chosen unanimously by its members to serve as president in 1992 and 1996. As Council President, Mayor Street was known for his expertise on a range of issues including city budgeting and fiscal matters, housing, education and crime. Working with then-Mayor Edward G. Rendell, Mayor Street helped craft and implement a financial plan that turned a $250 million deficit into the largest surplus in city history.
Since her election to the Senate in 1992, Senator Feinstein has worked in a bipartisan way to build a significant record of legislative accomplishments helping strengthen the nation's security both here and abroad, combat crime and violence, battle cancer, and protect natural resources in California and across the country.
In her twelve years in the State Legislature, Sen. Kuehl has authored 160 bills that have been signed into law. She has championed gender-related issues, writing legislation establishing the rights contained in Roe vs. Wade in California statute, strengthening protection for domestic violence victims and their children, and prohibiting discrimination on the basis of gender and disability in the workplace and sexual orientation in education. She has also authored legislation establishing paid family leave, overhauling California's child support services system, establishing nurse to patient ratios in every hospital, increasing the rights of crime victims, and safeguarding the environment and drinking water.
"Senator Clinton has an excellent concept about how she plans to address issues surrounding crime and education. She described how she has partnered with leaders in New York to create a charter school specifically for African American men and notes that the Allen Cathedral AME Church charter school in Jamaica Queens, New York could be used as a model of how to help educate African American young men. Her mentioning of the school shows that she's aware of outstanding successful examples of education in this country. The way she addressed the need for the federal government to partner with inner cities suggests that she's not just focusing on international issues but that she's concerned with domestic ones - particularly crime and violence in our communities. I want a president who knows how to strike a balance between addressing international and domestic challenges facing this country," said Reverend Dr. Harold R. Mayberry, Senior Pastor of First African Methodist Episcopal Church and Chairperson of Network for Interfaith Action.
"Hillary Clinton has answers for the questions on how to revitalize our urban communities. Her approach to handling public safety, youth violence and crime is timely. She is relevant because she will implement a comprehensive healthcare, employment and economic development plan. Because of her experience, she can extend and expand upon both Bill Clinton's and Lyndon Johnson's initiatives," said Paul Cobb, Bay Area community leader and publisher of the Oakland Post.
5. Modernize and strengthen the federal hate crimes law. Hillary will:
5. Modernize and strengthen the federal hate crimes law. The hate crimes law currently on the books authorizes federal prosecution of those who use force or the threat of force to injure or intimidate a person (1) because of that person's race, religion, or national origin; and (2) because he or she has been attempting to engage in a federally protected activity, such as voting, attending court, or going to school. Most states also have hate crimes laws. As Senator, Hillary has consistently supported legislation to strengthen America's hate crimes law. President Bush has threatened to veto this legislation, should it pass the Senate. As President, Hillary will sign into law the Local Law Enforcement Hate Crimes Prevention Act, which:
Reardon was elected County Executive in 2004, after serving five years in the State Legislature. In his first term, Reardon has closed a $13.4 million deficit without raising taxes and increased the number of sheriff's deputies and prosecutors to combat meth labs and street level crime. His Focus on Farming initiative and Agriculture Action Plan have created new economic opportunities for area farmers while preserving farmlands.
Hillary has been a longtime friend of the LGBT community. She has fought for policies that promote equality, while taking a strong stand against forces that have tried to marginalize the LGBT community. As President, Hillary will replace the divisive leadership of the past six years and work with the LGBT community and allies in Congress to pass hate crimes legislation and overturn the military's "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy. She knows that working together, we can continue to combat hate and stand united for equality.
Law Enforcement for Indian Country: American Indians experience violence at rates more than twice the rate for the country as a whole. [vii] There are only about 2,500 Bureau of Indian Affairs and tribal uniformed police officers serving an estimated 1.4 million Indians covering more than 56 million acres of tribal lands in the lower 48 states. On tribal lands, 1.3 officers must serve every 1,000 citizens, compared to 2.9 officers per 1,000 citizens in non-Indian communities with populations under 10,000. [viii] These staffing levels are simply insufficient to meet the law enforcement challenges facing Indian Country. Amnesty International recently released a report that concluded that one in three Native American women will be raped in her lifetime. And, in recent years methamphetamine has disproportionately devastated Native American tribal communities- Native Americans are more than four times as likely as whites to use crystal methamphetamine. [ix] An informal survey of the seven FBI offices located primarily in Indian Country estimated that approximately 40-50% of violent crime cases investigated in Indian Country involve meth. [x] Hillary supports providing resources for law enforcement in Indian Country, promoting state-tribal cooperative agreements where appropriate to reduce crime, and improving the collection of data on Indian Country crime and how those crimes are handled by authorities.
Seventh, we need a renewed focus on law enforcement efforts on Native lands. It's simply outrageous that when American Indians are twice as likely to be victims of violent crimes, there are fewer than half as many police on tribal lands as non-tribal lands. And with the methamphetamine crisis affecting so many communities, the need for law enforcement resources in Indian Country is greater than ever.
During the event, Senator Clinton discussed her agenda for a stronger America through job creation, quality education, health care for all and ending the war in Iraq. She outlined her plans to provide good jobs with good wages; encourage private sector investment and business growth in low-income areas; create more affordable housing in urban neighborhoods and ensure a strong federal-local partnership to fight crime.
Society pays the price too. When a student drops out of school, society suffers from untapped potential. We may be losing the next John Glenn or Maya Angelou or a great fourth grade teacher. Instead of contributing to the richness of our country's talent and culture, high school dropouts are more likely to require long-term government help just to survive. In fact, forty percent of young people without a high school diploma received some type of government assistance in 2001. High school dropouts are more than eight times as likely to be in jail or prison compared to someone with a high school diploma. According to the Gates Foundation, the lifetime cost to the nation for each youth who drops out of school and later moves into a life of crime and drugs ranges from $1.7 million to $2.3 million. The government would reap $45 billion if the number of high school dropouts were cut in half. In short, the cost of untapped potential in our society is too great and is unbecoming of a nation made strong and vibrant by its diverse population, economy, and cultural traditions.
Nobel Prize-winning economist James Heckman has said early intervention preschool programs for children from low-income families lead to higher achievement test scores, decreased grade retention, reduced time in special education, less crime and delinquency and increased high school graduation rates. Hillary thinks it's critical that we invest in early childhood education in order to address the dropout rate from the very start. That's why she has proposed to:
As the foreclosures mount, the housing crisis is also becoming a municipal crisis. Cities and towns face the prospect of blight, higher crime rates, vacant properties marring neighborhoods, cutting tax receipts, and dragging down property values.
Baker has focused on fighting crime, corruption and consumer fraud since he was named Attorney General in 1997, winning election in 1998 and reelection in 2002 and 2006. Baker is the immediate past President of the National Association of Attorneys General.
Hillary Clinton, however, receives our support for her long standing commitment to implement the Dellums Commission agenda which addresses employment and anti-crime measures. Her experience, knowledge and commitment will serve us well. Her success as New York's senator where she demonstrated an ability to work both sides of the aisle bodes well as to how she could bring us together as a nation. The Post News Group and El Mundo agrees with assembly member Sandre Swanson, council members Ignacio De La Fuente and Jean Quan, Mayors Ron Dellums, Gavin Newsom, Antonio Villaraigosa, and Congresswoman Maxine Waters along with half of the members of the Congressional Black Caucus that Hillary Clinton has the mettle to fight for a green economy, increased educational support, withdrawal from Iraq, jobs for ex-offenders, foreclosure protection and the prosecution of predatory lenders, and increased support for urban areas.
"America's prison population has grown at a staggering rate over the past quarter century. A new report now reveals a staggering and heart-breaking statistic: One in 100 American adults is currently behind bars. Our incarceration rate is several times greater than that of any other developed country. To state it plainly, the 1-in-100 figure represents a failure of our society at a number of levels. And the cost – to our families, to our communities, and to state budgets to the tune of almost $50 billion – are simply too great to bear. Many of those costs are borne disproportionately by minority communities: One in 15 African American adults is behind bars, and one in 36 Hispanic adults. We need a President who will be tough on crime, but smart about it too. A President who will take innovative steps to ensure our crime policies are reducing crime in the long run so that we have fewer victims of crime and fewer prisoners."
"To reverse this alarming trend, interventions are needed before crimes are committed, before offenders are shipped to prison, during their terms of incarceration, and as they are released and begin to reintegrate themselves into our communities. I will work to deter crime by re-investing in our communities, re-invigorating the COPS program, and putting 100,000 new officers committed to community policing into neighborhoods across America. Studies have shown that the COPS program deters crime. And I will close the revolving prison door by reforming our sentencing policies, promoting effective alternatives to incarceration, and investing in new "second chance" Reentry Partnership Grants to support reformed offenders and reduce recidivism. The solutions are within our grasp. What we need now is leadership, and that's what I'll provide."
Hillary will put more police on Puerto Rico's streets. Hillary will restore Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) funding, which in the past provided $155 million in grants to Puerto Rican law enforcement agencies and funded 3,675 additional police officers. She will also provide funding for programs President Bush has sought to eliminate, such as the Justice Assistance grants to improve Puerto Rico's criminal justice system and support crime fighting activities. And she will fund the Puerto Rico-Virgin Islands High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area.
The housing crisis is also a crisis for our cities, our towns and our neighborhoods. At least 41 million homes will lose value because of foreclosures in their neighborhoods, including 1.7 million homes right here in Pennsylvania. Abandoned homes and boarded up neighborhoods mean higher crime rates, lower property values, and plummeting tax receipts for cities and towns across America. Now, a year ago in March 2007 I called for immediate action to address abuses in the subprime market, and I laid out detailed concrete proposals for how to do so. I warned this administration that the problems in subprime mortgages would soon spill over into regular mortgages. The response from our president? Well, his Treasury Secretary told Congress that the problem was, quote, "contained." And president himself assured us there would be a, quote, "soft landing for the housing market." The housing crisis then spread from subprime to traditional mortgages. And in August of last year, I warned the administration that the housing mortgage crisis would soon ripple out throughout the entire economy. Again, I called for immediate action and laid out concrete proposals to prevent foreclosures and help states hard hit by this crisis.
It could be used to help neighborhoods with high foreclosure rates avoid increased crime and blight by investing in everything from police and fire support to graffiti removal and better lighting.
Sen. Clinton has displayed a profound understanding of the root causes of crime and violence, and I commend her commitment to coordinating efforts at the federal, state, and local levels to better serve local communities. The weight of this ongoing tragedy of crime and violence gives context to the urgency of this issue. This is a multi-dimensional problem that requires a multi-dimensional response that includes strategies on prevention, intervention, enforcement, and sustainability. I am confident that Sen. Clinton represents the greatest opportunity cities have to expand and strengthen our federal and local partnerships and improve the quality of life for all Americans.
Sen. Clinton's plan for safe communities extends beyond these good public safety initiatives. In Memphis, some youth are at high risk of turning to crime and lack many resources that are proven protection from such risk. Her Presidential candidacy also speaks to reducing poverty, high-school drop rates, unemployment, and family violence. As an advocate for the Children's Defense Fund, she understands these issues. We must help our youth to develop life plans that inspire and give promise for tomorrow. This is what we must do today.
Recently, the United States Conference of Mayors, of which I am privileged to serve as president, convened a meeting to address this crisis of mass incarceration and prisoner relapse. Sen. Clinton's plan to create a $1 billion "Closing the Prison Revolving Door" competitive grant is a big step in the right direction to reducing the number of repeat offenders and reducing the prison population, while cutting crime in our communities. I support her ideas of reforming states' parole systems and drug diversion programs, providing productive in-prison programs for inmates, and providing meaningful services and economic opportunities for ex-offenders.
In Los Angeles, Chief William Bratton and I have made reducing gang violence our number one priority. I commend Sen. Clinton for making it an important part of her plan, and I strongly support her Gang Reduction Grant program, which will help cities like Los Angeles fight gangs and reduce violent crime.
Previewing Today: Hillary delivers a "Solutions for Safe and Secure Communities Now" speech in West Philadelphia with Mayor Michael Nutter and outlines her $4 billion a year crime-fighting plan...the plan cuts murders in half, and "put[s] 100,000 more cops on the streets, create[s] a $1 billion grant program to fight recidivism, and provide[s] more funds to combat gangs and drugs." Read more and more.
At a speech in Philadelphia today, Hillary Clinton unveiled an ambitious new anti-crime agenda that would cut the murder rate in big cities in half and put 100,000 new police officers on America's streets. Through her plan called "Solutions for Safe and Secure Communities Now," Hillary would also invest $1 billion competitive grant program to reduce the number of repeat offenders and the size of the population in prisons and juvenile lock-ups nationwide. In addition, Hillary will partner with states and communities to support early intervention programs that would prevent at-risk youth from engaging in criminal activity.
Hillary delivered her remarks at the West Philadelphia YMCA, joined by Mayor Michael Nutter, who has made fighting crime a top priority. In Philadelphia, there were 392 murders last year – an average of more than one murder a day. In the plan, Hillary addresses many of the issues that big city mayors confront, including gang violence, drug sales, and illegal gun trafficking. Mayor Douglas Palmer of Trenton, NJ and President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors also joined Hillary at the event.
Hillary also calls for additional funds to stop online crimes such as child exploitation and identity theft. Hillary will direct the Attorney General to make online child exploitation and harassment a major federal priority, and vigorously prosecute identity theft, particularly theft of children's identities. She will strengthen and vigorously enforce federal laws against online child exploitation, and she will dramatically increase funding for state Internet Crimes Against Children task forces.
After major reductions in the 1990s, violent crime has been on the rise in recent years, and in many places the threat is growing rapidly, fueled by a dangerous mix of drugs, illegal guns, and at-risk youth who often believe they have nowhere to turn but to gangs and violence. More than 1 in 100 Americans are now behind bars, 19 out of 20 will eventually return to their communities – 700,000 per year, not necessarily better than when they went in. Offenders leaving our nation's prisons will account for almost 10 million new crimes by 2013. The Police Executive Research Forum has described a "gathering storm" of violent crime. The Third Way projects that – unless policies or facts on the ground fundamentally change – a growing youth population will account for additional 2.5 million crimes by 2012.
As President, Hillary Clinton will move swiftly and decisively to restore the federal government's commitment to helping states and local governments reduce violent crime. Her agenda is built on the idea of partnership. The federal government will serve as a partner with states, counties and communities – supplying the necessary resources, innovative practices and technological support to help states and local governments confront the evolving challenges of crime and hometown security.
Hillary's crime agenda will address the urgent challenge of violent crime rates and homicide, and work to close the prison revolving door, protect children and families from 21st Century threats like methamphetamine and online child exploitation. As President she will:
Violent crime has risen in recent years. From 1994 through 2000, violent crime fell 29% and the murder rate fell 39%. From 2000 to 2006, violent crime fell only 6% – the murder rate actually rose 9%. [FBI 2002, 2006; James Alan Fox, 2007.] And in 2005 and 2006, the violent crime rate rose in two consecutive years for the first time since the passage of the Clinton Crime Bill in 1994. From 1993 to 2001, the number of crimes involving guns fell by roughly half, but has risen by almost 20% since President Bush took office. Meanwhile, per capita police protection rates in large cities have fallen by roughly 10%. [FBI, 2000, 2006; Fox, 2006.]
The Bush Administration has severely reduced the federal commitment to fighting crime. Bush budgets have cut criminal justice aid to state and local law enforcement in half. [Office of the Majority Leader, 2007.] In 2006, the Bush Justice Department outright eliminated the COPS hiring program that put 100,000 new community police officers on the beat in the 1990s. Congress has now partially restored the program. COPS works: Yale economist John Donohue found that each $1.4 billion invested in the COPS program is likely to generate a benefit to society from $6 billion to $12 billion. Philadelphia and other cities and counties have suffered because of the Bush administration's neglect: Philadelphia is down 500 officers from its personnel high during the Clinton Administration. The looming recession makes the problem more urgent. Battered by the economic downturn and neglected by the administration, cities and towns across Pennsylvania and the United States are being forced to make impossible choices between laying off cops, cutting aid for schools, or raising taxes in a recession.
Hillary will also make available gang and drug funding to cities facing violent crime problems but where homicide is less of a challenge. In addition to these components, Hillary will make sure that federal government law enforcement – including the FBI – has the resources it needs to serve as an effective partner with states and local communities, including developing and sharing intelligence on drug trafficking and gangs that operate across state and national borders.
Community Prosecution Initiative. Community-oriented prosecutors have a key role to play in reducing crime, just as community-oriented police do – and they need federal funding and support, just as community oriented police do. Community prosecutors focus not just on closing cases and clearing dockets, but on reducing crime and improving the quality of life in the neighborhoods to which they are assigned. Hillary will allocate $250 million per year to help local district attorneys hire and train community prosecutors.
Federal support for other crime-fighting programs. Hillary will reverse the funding cuts to the Byrne Justice Assistant Grant program and restore funding to other DOJ local law enforcement assistance programs. Of course, all of these grants will be subject to audit by the Inspector General to prevent and deter waste, fraud and abuse. Hillary will also make permanent and fully fund the Bulletproof Vest Program.
Hillary will make major investments in a comprehensive set of initiatives that help at-risk kids get off on the right path, and stay there. Research has repeatedly proven that some of our most powerful policies to help reduce crime and violence focus on prevention. For example, a study of one high-quality after-school program found that boys left out of the program averaged six times more crimes than teens in the program. And over fifteen years, children who participated in the Nurse Family Partnership program experienced 69 percent fewer convictions at age 15. Hillary has already proposed significant early investments that will pay off in less crime over the long run, including:
Hillary will expand enforcement of and increase penalties for identity theft and other cybercrimes. She will:
Make it a federal crime to manufacture or distribute a controlled substance - including meth - that is colored, packaged, or otherwise altered in a way designed to appeal to kids and young people. Last year, the DEA reported that drug dealers are coloring meth crystals and giving them names like "Strawberry Quick." The crystals resemble "pop rocks" and other forms of candy. One goal of dealers is to try to lure in young customers "by making meth seem less dangerous." Hillary will sternly punish any dealer or trafficker of meth that colors, packages, or otherwise alters the drug to appeal to young people.
Direct the new Attorney General to conduct a 90-day review of all Deferred Prosecution Agreements and report to her on how to strengthen prosecution efforts against corporate wrongdoers. Over the last three years, the Justice Department has chosen to settle with more than 50 companies suspected of wrongdoing rather than press for a conviction. The New York Times describes this as a "major shift in policy." Under so-called deferred prosecution agreements, DOJ appoints an outside monitor to impose agreed-upon reforms at the company and the government collects fines. But the companies in question do not plead guilty and the charges against them are ultimately dismissed. The Bush administration has entered into agreements with companies ranging from American Express to KPMG to Merrill Lynch, dealing with crimes ranging from export control violations to Medicare fraud to environmental violations. Reliance on deferred prosecution agreements can weaken deterrence by leading companies to believe they can just cut a deal and make the criminal charges go away. And it suggests that the current administration is seeking to shelter wealthy and powerful entities from criminal prosecution. Hillary will direct her Attorney General to report to her on this practice, reduce its use, and increase the number of serious and meaningful prosecutions of corporate criminals. 
Hillary's agenda for lifting up America's cities provides education and opportunity to youth in urban cities; encourages more economic opportunity; invests in urban areas; fights crime and violence; tackles poverty; and rebuilds crumbling physical infrastructure. Members of the African American community are praising Hillary Clinton for taking the lead in addressing the issues that are of great concern in urban communities.
Hillary Clinton discussed her urban agenda - http://hillaryclinton.com/feature/cities/- Friday, April 11th, at the West Philadelphia YMCA. The urban agenda serves as a plan to bring all American cities into the 21st century and reestablish a real partnership between cities and the federal government. To date, Senator Clinton is the only candidate to directly address the issue of urban violence with an aggressive crime fighting plan that will cut homicides in half.
To read more about Hillary Clinton's crime policy agenda click the following link. http://www.hillaryclinton.com/news/release/view/?id=7033
Hillary Clinton unveiled her proposal to provide increased opportunity and improve the quality of services for South Dakota's Native American community today. Her plan, grounded in the principle of tribal sovereignty, focuses on job creation, improving the quality of health care and combating crime.
"Native Americans had a productive partnership with the Clinton administration during the 1990's, and Hillary understands the importance of that partnership in improving the quality of life in our community," said Lula Red Cloud. "Native Americans in South Dakota need a President who will provide economic opportunities and curb the health, addiction and crime problems that are sweeping across our communities, and Hillary has the proposals and the experience to do just that."
The plan also targets increased crime rates, particularly crimes related to the sale and use of crystal meth, by providing additional resources for Indian country law enforcement.
Law Enforcement for Indian Country: American Indians experience violence at rates more than twice the rate for the country as a whole.[xi] In 2007, 63 percent of defendants charged in South Dakota were Native American.[xii] There are only about 2,500 Bureau of Indian Affairs and tribal uniformed police officers serving an estimated 1.4 million Indians covering more than 56 million acres of tribal lands in the lower 48 states. On tribal lands, 1.3 officers must serve every 1,000 citizens, compared to 2.9 officers per 1,000 citizens in non-Indian communities with populations under 10,000.[xiii] These staffing levels are simply insufficient to meet the law enforcement challenges facing Indian Country. Amnesty International recently released a report that concluded that one in three Native American women will be raped in her lifetime. And, in recent years methamphetamine has disproportionately devastated Native American tribal communities- Native Americans are more than four times as likely as whites to use crystal methamphetamine.[xiv] In South Dakota a rate of about 2.9 percent of the population between the ages of 18 and 25 reported methamphetamine use.[xv] An informal survey of the seven FBI offices located primarily in Indian Country estimated that approximately 40-50% of violent crime cases investigated in Indian Country involve meth.[xvi] Hillary supports providing resources for law enforcement in Indian Country, promoting state-tribal cooperative agreements where appropriate to reduce crime, and improving the collection of data on Indian Country crime and how those crimes are handled by authorities.
Law Enforcement for Indian Country: American Indians experience violence at rates more than twice the rate for the country as a whole. There are only about 2,500 Bureau of Indian Affairs and tribal uniformed police officers serving an estimated 1.4 million Indians covering more than 56 million acres of tribal lands in the lower 48 states. On tribal lands, 1.3 officers must serve every 1,000 citizens, compared to 2.9 officers per 1,000 citizens in non-Indian communities with populations under 10,000. [vi]These staffing levels are simply insufficient to meet the law enforcement challenges facing Indian Country. Amnesty International recently released a report that concluded that one in three Native American women will be raped in her lifetime. And, in recent years methamphetamine has disproportionately devastated Native American tribal communities- Native Americans are more than four times as likely as whites to use crystal methamphetamine. [vii] Montana has one of the highest abuses rates of methamphetamine use in the country with a rate of about three percent of the population between the ages of 18 and 25 reported using. [viii] An informal survey of the seven FBI offices located primarily in Indian Country estimated that approximately 40-50% of violent crime cases investigated in Indian Country involve meth.[ix] Hillary supports providing resources for law enforcement in Indian Country, promoting state-tribal cooperative agreements where appropriate to reduce crime, and improving the collection of data on Indian Country crime and how those crimes are handled by authorities.
Law Enforcement for Indian Country: American Indians experience violence at rates more than twice the rate for the country as a whole. There are only about 2,500 Bureau of Indian Affairs and tribal uniformed police officers serving an estimated 1.4 million Indians covering more than 56 million acres of tribal lands in the lower 48 states. On tribal lands, 1.3 officers must serve every 1,000 citizens, compared to 2.9 officers per 1,000 citizens in non-Indian communities with populations under 10,000. [vi]These staffing levels are simply insufficient to meet the law enforcement challenges facing Indian Country. Amnesty International recently released a report that concluded that one in three Native American women will be raped in her lifetime. And, in recent years methamphetamine has disproportionately devastated Native American tribal communities- Native Americans are more than four times as likely as whites to use crystal methamphetamine. [vii] Montana has one of the highest abuses rates of methamphetamine use in the country with a rate of about three percent of the population between the ages of 18 and 25 reported using. [viii] An informal survey of the seven FBI offices located primarily in Indian Country estimated that approximately 40-50% of violent crime cases investigated in Indian Country involve meth.[ix] Hillary supports providing resources for law enforcement in Indian Country, promoting state-tribal cooperative agreements where appropriate to reduce crime, and improving the collection of data on Indian Country crime and how those crimes are handled by authorities.
"I am honored to have the support of men and women who are proven and respected leaders in Indian Country," said Hillary. "I am committed to working with Native Americans in South Dakota and across the country, with complete respect and acknowledgement of tribal sovereignty, to create more economic opportunity, and tackle the health care and crime problems too many in Indian Country face."
"There can be no questioning Hillary's commitment to Native Americans here in South Dakota and across the country," said Chairman Brandon Sazue, Sr. of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe. "She has laid out specific proposals to partner with us to help tackle the challenges we face, from chronic unemployment to juvenile diabetes to a skyrocketing crime rate. She will be a President who respects tribal sovereignty and she will work to reverse the effects of seven years of neglect from the Bush Administration."
There is something profoundly wrong when African American men are still far more likely to be stopped and searched by police, charged with crimes, and sentenced to longer prison terms than are meted out to their white counterparts.
First, we need smart strategies to fight crime that help restore trust between law enforcement and our communities, especially communities of color.
And we should listen to law enforcement leaders who are calling for a renewed focus on working with communities to prevent crime, rather than measuring success just by the number of arrests or convictions.
David Dinkins was an early pioneer of this policy. His leadership helped lay the foundation for dramatic drops in crime in the years that followed.
It's a stark fact that the United States has less than 5 percent of the world's population, yet we have almost 25 percent of the world's total prison population. The numbers today are much higher than they were 30, 40 years ago, despite the fact that crime is at historic lows.
Of the more than 2 million Americans incarcerated today, a significant percentage are low-level offenders: people held for violating parole or minor drug crimes, or who are simply awaiting trial in backlogged courts.
Keeping them behind bars does little to reduce crime. But it is does a lot to tear apart families and communities.
And last year, the Sentencing Commission reduced recommended prison terms for some drug crimes.
That's why, as a Senator, I championed a bill called the Count Every Vote Act. If it had become law, it would have made Election Day a federal holiday and mandated early voting opportunities. Deceiving voters, including by sending flyers into minority neighborhoods with false voting times and places, would have become a federal crime. And many Americans with criminal convictions who had paid their debts to society would have finally gotten their voting rights back.
This is just unsustainable, and we need to stand against it and I'm willing to take them on. Because I know that guns are at the root of so much of the crime and the danger that stalks our neighborhoods.
This is a hard path to walk, but I know we can do it. We've learned lessons. We have a lot that we now know especially when it comes to imprisoning low level offenders is not necessary to prevent crime on the streets. Let's focus on the bad actors that we don't want setting up crack houses again that you have to go and try to close or joining gangs that are so deadly people are dying across the streets in the country.
Now I know that like many places across the country, there's more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement. Just last month, I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer. And I understand an investigation is underway. Whatever the outcome, tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism.

  " African American men are far more likely to be stopped and searched by police, charged with crimes, and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men—10 percent longer for the same crimes in the federal system."
We need to end to racial profiling once and for all—and prohibit law enforcement from relying on race in routine stops and investigations where there is no information linking a person to a crime.
2. She worked to restore voting rights for those who had been convicted of a crime and served their sentences.
Trump: "When Mexico Sends Its People, They're Not Sending Their Best…They're Bringing Drugs. They're Bringing Crime. They're Rapists." TRUMP: "When Mexico sends its people, they're not sending their best. They're not sending you. They're not sending you. They're sending people that have lots of problems, and they're bringing those problems with us. They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists." [Trump Presidential Announcement Speech, New York NY, 6/16/15]
"Every day, volunteers in programs like AmeriCorps are making a difference by serving in communities across America. Secretary Clinton's plan builds on national service success, meeting an unmet demand for service opportunities, expanding AmeriCorps and creating a National Service Reserve. Her proposals call on 5 million Americans to give back to their country and be a part of something bigger than themselves. These volunteers will tutor teens, start neighborhood crime watches, and help towns rebuild after disasters. Hillary knows that service is the very spirit of our country. She is committed to giving a new generation of Americans the opportunity to the answer the call to transform communities and transform lives." – Senator Barbara Mikulski
"The facts here are clear: These men were exonerated. Another man has admitted to committing the crime, as proven by DNA evidence. Trump rushed to judgment on the case, has refused to admit he is wrong and continues to peddle yet another racist lie, a pattern for him and a clear reason why he is unfit to be president."
He has said that he thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and des-pair. He has no idea -- no idea about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black-owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities.

And we saw that again in the way he treated the Central Park Five. These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14, who were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York City back in 1990. Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence.

And in addition, someone else confessed to the crime, so they were finally released from prison. But not only did Trump refuse to apologize for what he had said about them and even calling for their executions, he actually said, "They should still be in prison." Evidence didn't matter. The law didn't matter. To him, those kids would always be guilty.

Is this someone that we want to treat people the way he has demonstrated, his disrespect throughout this campaign. In a country that values, religious liberty and freedom. Someone who would ban every Muslim in the world from ever coming to our country. Someone who thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea, none, about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities, the rise of a new generation of black activists for social justice and the success of black leaders in every field. Remember how he denied housing to Mae Brown Wiggins. And Mae wasn't alone. Whenever African Americans tried to rent an apartment, their application was marked with a "C" -- "C" for colored.

And then another recent example is the way Donald Trump treated what are called the "Central Park Five." These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. Who, it turns out, were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York back in 1990.

Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence. Also, someone else confessed to the crime. So they were finally released from prison and justice was done, but not only did Donald Trump refuse to apologize for calling for their execution, he actually said they should still be in prison.

We will reform our criminal justice system from end to end. It is wrong. And I don't care whether you are black or white. It is wrong that black men are far more likely to be stopped by police, charged and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for the same crimes. It's wrong, and we're going to do something about that. And Donald Trump, whenever he's face with these issues says "well the answer to our problems is more law and order." He doesn't tell you what he means by that, but it's kind of code for fear and division. What I think we need to do, is to work together to restore trust between our police and our communities.

If Donald wins the election, we'd have a president who wants to ban every Muslim in the world from coming to visit the United States. We are a country founded on religious freedom. That runs contrary to our Constitution. We would have a president who has said repeatedly that he thinks the lives of black people are all about crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea about the strength of the black church and the vibrancy of black-owned businesses and the excellence of historically black colleges and universities. He seems to know nothing about the rise of a new generation of black activists and the success of black leaders in every field. I think he needs a visit from Reverend Wendell Anthony, don't you?

He has such a casual disregard of our Constitution. He doesn't seem to understand the rule of law, that we really are a nation of laws, not men. Here's the latest example. There was a terrible crime back in 1990 in New York City. It was called the Central Park Five. Maybe some of you have heard of it. There were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. They were wrongfully convinced, and they were in prison where they spent years. Donald Trump took out full-page ads calling for the death penalty for the kids. And even after they were exonerated by DNA evidence and someone else confessed to that terrible crime, Trump actually said they should still be in prison. It doesn't matter if you're innocent. If he decides that you should be in prison or you should be locked up. No wonder he admired Vladimir Putin, because that's exactly what Putin does to his people.

Hillary Clinton has worked to advance the cause of equality for LGBT Americans for many years. As president, Clinton has pledged to end the divisive leadership of the past six years and work with the LGBT community to make sure that all Americans in committed relationships have equal economic benefits and rights. She also will work to end discrimination in adoption laws. As a U.S. Senator, she has worked to expand federal hate crimes legislation and pass the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, and will sign the legislation into law once she is in the White House. She will also put an end to the failed policy of Don't Ask, Don't Tell.
At a speech in Philadelphia today, Hillary Clinton unveiled an ambitious new anti-crime agenda that would cut the murder rate in big cities in half and put 100,000 new police officers on America's streets. Through her plan called "Solutions for Safe and Secure Communities Now," Hillary would also invest $1 billion competitive grant program to reduce the number of repeat offenders and the size of the population in prisons and juvenile lock-ups nationwide. In addition, Hillary will partner with states and communities to support early intervention programs that would prevent at-risk youth from engaging in criminal activity.
Hillary delivered her remarks at the West Philadelphia YMCA, joined by Mayor Michael Nutter, who has made fighting crime a top priority. In Philadelphia, there were 392 murders last year – an average of more than one murder a day. In the plan, Hillary addresses many of the issues that big city mayors confront, including gang violence, drug sales, and illegal gun trafficking. Mayor Douglas Palmer of Trenton, NJ and President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors also joined Hillary at the event.
Hillary also calls for additional funds to stop online crimes such as child exploitation and identity theft. Hillary will direct the Attorney General to make online child exploitation and harassment a major federal priority, and vigorously prosecute identity theft, particularly theft of children's identities. She will strengthen and vigorously enforce federal laws against online child exploitation, and she will dramatically increase funding for state Internet Crimes Against Children task forces.
After major reductions in the 1990s, violent crime has been on the rise in recent years, and in many places the threat is growing rapidly, fueled by a dangerous mix of drugs, illegal guns, and at-risk youth who often believe they have nowhere to turn but to gangs and violence. More than 1 in 100 Americans are now behind bars, 19 out of 20 will eventually return to their communities – 700,000 per year, not necessarily better than when they went in. Offenders leaving our nation's prisons will account for almost 10 million new crimes by 2013. The Police Executive Research Forum has described a "gathering storm" of violent crime. The Third Way projects that – unless policies or facts on the ground fundamentally change – a growing youth population will account for additional 2.5 million crimes by 2012.
As President, Hillary Clinton will move swiftly and decisively to restore the federal government's commitment to helping states and local governments reduce violent crime. Her agenda is built on the idea of partnership. The federal government will serve as a partner with states, counties and communities – supplying the necessary resources, innovative practices and technological support to help states and local governments confront the evolving challenges of crime and hometown security.
Hillary's crime agenda will address the urgent challenge of violent crime rates and homicide, and work to close the prison revolving door, protect children and families from 21st Century threats like methamphetamine and online child exploitation. As President she will:
Violent crime has risen in recent years. From 1994 through 2000, violent crime fell 29% and the murder rate fell 39%. From 2000 to 2006, violent crime fell only 6% – the murder rate actually rose 9%. [FBI 2002, 2006; James Alan Fox, 2007.] And in 2005 and 2006, the violent crime rate rose in two consecutive years for the first time since the passage of the Clinton Crime Bill in 1994. From 1993 to 2001, the number of crimes involving guns fell by roughly half, but has risen by almost 20% since President Bush took office. Meanwhile, per capita police protection rates in large cities have fallen by roughly 10%. [FBI, 2000, 2006; Fox, 2006.]
The Bush Administration has severely reduced the federal commitment to fighting crime. Bush budgets have cut criminal justice aid to state and local law enforcement in half. [Office of the Majority Leader, 2007.] In 2006, the Bush Justice Department outright eliminated the COPS hiring program that put 100,000 new community police officers on the beat in the 1990s. Congress has now partially restored the program. COPS works: Yale economist John Donohue found that each $1.4 billion invested in the COPS program is likely to generate a benefit to society from $6 billion to $12 billion. Philadelphia and other cities and counties have suffered because of the Bush administration's neglect: Philadelphia is down 500 officers from its personnel high during the Clinton Administration. The looming recession makes the problem more urgent. Battered by the economic downturn and neglected by the administration, cities and towns across Pennsylvania and the United States are being forced to make impossible choices between laying off cops, cutting aid for schools, or raising taxes in a recession.
Hillary will also make available gang and drug funding to cities facing violent crime problems but where homicide is less of a challenge. In addition to these components, Hillary will make sure that federal government law enforcement – including the FBI – has the resources it needs to serve as an effective partner with states and local communities, including developing and sharing intelligence on drug trafficking and gangs that operate across state and national borders.
Community Prosecution Initiative. Community-oriented prosecutors have a key role to play in reducing crime, just as community-oriented police do – and they need federal funding and support, just as community oriented police do. Community prosecutors focus not just on closing cases and clearing dockets, but on reducing crime and improving the quality of life in the neighborhoods to which they are assigned. Hillary will allocate $250 million per year to help local district attorneys hire and train community prosecutors.
Federal support for other crime-fighting programs. Hillary will reverse the funding cuts to the Byrne Justice Assistant Grant program and restore funding to other DOJ local law enforcement assistance programs. Of course, all of these grants will be subject to audit by the Inspector General to prevent and deter waste, fraud and abuse. Hillary will also make permanent and fully fund the Bulletproof Vest Program.
Hillary will make major investments in a comprehensive set of initiatives that help at-risk kids get off on the right path, and stay there. Research has repeatedly proven that some of our most powerful policies to help reduce crime and violence focus on prevention. For example, a study of one high-quality after-school program found that boys left out of the program averaged six times more crimes than teens in the program. And over fifteen years, children who participated in the Nurse Family Partnership program experienced 69 percent fewer convictions at age 15. Hillary has already proposed significant early investments that will pay off in less crime over the long run, including:
Hillary will expand enforcement of and increase penalties for identity theft and other cybercrimes. She will:
Make it a federal crime to manufacture or distribute a controlled substance - including meth - that is colored, packaged, or otherwise altered in a way designed to appeal to kids and young people. Last year, the DEA reported that drug dealers are coloring meth crystals and giving them names like "Strawberry Quick." The crystals resemble "pop rocks" and other forms of candy. One goal of dealers is to try to lure in young customers "by making meth seem less dangerous." Hillary will sternly punish any dealer or trafficker of meth that colors, packages, or otherwise alters the drug to appeal to young people.
Direct the new Attorney General to conduct a 90-day review of all Deferred Prosecution Agreements and report to her on how to strengthen prosecution efforts against corporate wrongdoers. Over the last three years, the Justice Department has chosen to settle with more than 50 companies suspected of wrongdoing rather than press for a conviction. The New York Times describes this as a "major shift in policy." Under so-called deferred prosecution agreements, DOJ appoints an outside monitor to impose agreed-upon reforms at the company and the government collects fines. But the companies in question do not plead guilty and the charges against them are ultimately dismissed. The Bush administration has entered into agreements with companies ranging from American Express to KPMG to Merrill Lynch, dealing with crimes ranging from export control violations to Medicare fraud to environmental violations. Reliance on deferred prosecution agreements can weaken deterrence by leading companies to believe they can just cut a deal and make the criminal charges go away. And it suggests that the current administration is seeking to shelter wealthy and powerful entities from criminal prosecution. Hillary will direct her Attorney General to report to her on this practice, reduce its use, and increase the number of serious and meaningful prosecutions of corporate criminals. 
Now I know that like many places across the country, there's more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement. Just last month, I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer. And I understand an investigation is underway. Whatever the outcome, tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism.
The leaders went to war crimes tribunal, but others for whom there wasn't evidence or they played minor roles were actually elected. Well, you can imagine. So I go to the parliament and I speak about democracy and all the rest of it and take some pictures and do some visits afterwards, and I thought boy, we think we have it hard, here she is trying to work with a Congress that includes people who were mortal enemies with one another against her, against others, and she's working so hard to make this democracy what it should be against tremendous odds.
He has said that he would order our military to carry out torture and the murder of civilians who are related to suspected terrorists – even though those are war crimes.
Secondly, I'd like to see the hate crimes legislation to be amended to include any kind of hate crimes on the basis of sexual orientation, which is what the language in the bill currently says. Well, I hope we can bring that up as well. Again, it's overdue. And, finally, I support civil unions. I think that this is a matter that historically has been left to the states because that's where decisions like these are made.
Miller, who has held several elected offices including Lieutenant Governor and Clark County District Attorney, is known for his leadership and advocacy for education, combating crime and protecting natural resources. During his tenure as governor, he was appointed by President Bill Clinton to the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations.
Mayor Menino, currently serving his fourth term as the Mayor of Boston, is credited with working to provide every child with a quality education, create affordable housing, lower the crime rate, revitalize Boston's neighborhoods, and promote a healthy lifestyle for all city residents. As President of the United States Conference of Mayors from 2002-2003, he championed homeland security and housing availability.
Hillary Clinton has worked to advance the cause of equality for LGBT Americans for many years. As president, Clinton has pledged to end the divisive leadership of the past six years and work with the LGBT community to make sure that all Americans in committed relationships have equal economic benefits and rights. She also will work to end discrimination in adoption laws. As a U.S. Senator, she has worked to expand federal hate crimes legislation and pass the Employment Non-Discrimination Act, and will sign the legislation into law once she is in the White House. She will also put an end to the failed policy of Don't Ask, Don't Tell.
Dinkins, New York City's first African-American Mayor, served as the 106th Mayor of the City of New York from 1990 to 1994. Among his many accomplishments was the institution of the widely praised "Safe Streets, Safe City" program, which hired thousands of new police officers and began the decline of crime rates in New York City. He established a system of after-school youth centers, Beacon Schools, and opened several Community Health Centers. Dinkins also led the fight to divest the City's $500 million dollars in pension funds invested in companies that did business with apartheid South Africa and worked to create an all civilian Police Oversight Board to review misconduct complaints.
Prior to his election as mayor, Street served 20 years on the Philadelphia City Council and was chosen unanimously by its members to serve as president in 1992 and 1996. As Council President, Mayor Street was known for his expertise on a range of issues including city budgeting and fiscal matters, housing, education and crime. Working with then-Mayor Edward G. Rendell, Mayor Street helped craft and implement a financial plan that turned a $250 million deficit into the largest surplus in city history.
In her twelve years in the State Legislature, Sen. Kuehl has authored 160 bills that have been signed into law. She has championed gender-related issues, writing legislation establishing the rights contained in Roe vs. Wade in California statute, strengthening protection for domestic violence victims and their children, and prohibiting discrimination on the basis of gender and disability in the workplace and sexual orientation in education. She has also authored legislation establishing paid family leave, overhauling California's child support services system, establishing nurse to patient ratios in every hospital, increasing the rights of crime victims, and safeguarding the environment and drinking water.
"Senator Clinton has an excellent concept about how she plans to address issues surrounding crime and education. She described how she has partnered with leaders in New York to create a charter school specifically for African American men and notes that the Allen Cathedral AME Church charter school in Jamaica Queens, New York could be used as a model of how to help educate African American young men. Her mentioning of the school shows that she's aware of outstanding successful examples of education in this country. The way she addressed the need for the federal government to partner with inner cities suggests that she's not just focusing on international issues but that she's concerned with domestic ones - particularly crime and violence in our communities. I want a president who knows how to strike a balance between addressing international and domestic challenges facing this country," said Reverend Dr. Harold R. Mayberry, Senior Pastor of First African Methodist Episcopal Church and Chairperson of Network for Interfaith Action.
"Hillary Clinton has answers for the questions on how to revitalize our urban communities. Her approach to handling public safety, youth violence and crime is timely. She is relevant because she will implement a comprehensive healthcare, employment and economic development plan. Because of her experience, she can extend and expand upon both Bill Clinton's and Lyndon Johnson's initiatives," said Paul Cobb, Bay Area community leader and publisher of the Oakland Post.
Delegate Lee represents Montgomery County and has been a leader on preventing Internet crimes and exploitation. She has also worked hard to sponsor and support legislation to ensure a quality education for all children, affordable and quality health care, clean environment, gun control, increased procurement opportunities for women and minority owned small businesses, and to fight domestic violence, senior and child abuse, hate crimes and drunk driving.
At a speech in Philadelphia today, Hillary Clinton unveiled an ambitious new anti-crime agenda that would cut the murder rate in big cities in half and put 100,000 new police officers on America's streets. Through her plan called "Solutions for Safe and Secure Communities Now," Hillary would also invest $1 billion competitive grant program to reduce the number of repeat offenders and the size of the population in prisons and juvenile lock-ups nationwide. In addition, Hillary will partner with states and communities to support early intervention programs that would prevent at-risk youth from engaging in criminal activity.
Hillary delivered her remarks at the West Philadelphia YMCA, joined by Mayor Michael Nutter, who has made fighting crime a top priority. In Philadelphia, there were 392 murders last year – an average of more than one murder a day. In the plan, Hillary addresses many of the issues that big city mayors confront, including gang violence, drug sales, and illegal gun trafficking. Mayor Douglas Palmer of Trenton, NJ and President of the U.S. Conference of Mayors also joined Hillary at the event.
Hillary also calls for additional funds to stop online crimes such as child exploitation and identity theft. Hillary will direct the Attorney General to make online child exploitation and harassment a major federal priority, and vigorously prosecute identity theft, particularly theft of children's identities. She will strengthen and vigorously enforce federal laws against online child exploitation, and she will dramatically increase funding for state Internet Crimes Against Children task forces.
After major reductions in the 1990s, violent crime has been on the rise in recent years, and in many places the threat is growing rapidly, fueled by a dangerous mix of drugs, illegal guns, and at-risk youth who often believe they have nowhere to turn but to gangs and violence. More than 1 in 100 Americans are now behind bars, 19 out of 20 will eventually return to their communities – 700,000 per year, not necessarily better than when they went in. Offenders leaving our nation's prisons will account for almost 10 million new crimes by 2013. The Police Executive Research Forum has described a "gathering storm" of violent crime. The Third Way projects that – unless policies or facts on the ground fundamentally change – a growing youth population will account for additional 2.5 million crimes by 2012.
As President, Hillary Clinton will move swiftly and decisively to restore the federal government's commitment to helping states and local governments reduce violent crime. Her agenda is built on the idea of partnership. The federal government will serve as a partner with states, counties and communities – supplying the necessary resources, innovative practices and technological support to help states and local governments confront the evolving challenges of crime and hometown security.
Hillary's crime agenda will address the urgent challenge of violent crime rates and homicide, and work to close the prison revolving door, protect children and families from 21st Century threats like methamphetamine and online child exploitation. As President she will:
Violent crime has risen in recent years. From 1994 through 2000, violent crime fell 29% and the murder rate fell 39%. From 2000 to 2006, violent crime fell only 6% – the murder rate actually rose 9%. [FBI 2002, 2006; James Alan Fox, 2007.] And in 2005 and 2006, the violent crime rate rose in two consecutive years for the first time since the passage of the Clinton Crime Bill in 1994. From 1993 to 2001, the number of crimes involving guns fell by roughly half, but has risen by almost 20% since President Bush took office. Meanwhile, per capita police protection rates in large cities have fallen by roughly 10%. [FBI, 2000, 2006; Fox, 2006.]
The Bush Administration has severely reduced the federal commitment to fighting crime. Bush budgets have cut criminal justice aid to state and local law enforcement in half. [Office of the Majority Leader, 2007.] In 2006, the Bush Justice Department outright eliminated the COPS hiring program that put 100,000 new community police officers on the beat in the 1990s. Congress has now partially restored the program. COPS works: Yale economist John Donohue found that each $1.4 billion invested in the COPS program is likely to generate a benefit to society from $6 billion to $12 billion. Philadelphia and other cities and counties have suffered because of the Bush administration's neglect: Philadelphia is down 500 officers from its personnel high during the Clinton Administration. The looming recession makes the problem more urgent. Battered by the economic downturn and neglected by the administration, cities and towns across Pennsylvania and the United States are being forced to make impossible choices between laying off cops, cutting aid for schools, or raising taxes in a recession.
Hillary will also make available gang and drug funding to cities facing violent crime problems but where homicide is less of a challenge. In addition to these components, Hillary will make sure that federal government law enforcement – including the FBI – has the resources it needs to serve as an effective partner with states and local communities, including developing and sharing intelligence on drug trafficking and gangs that operate across state and national borders.
Community Prosecution Initiative. Community-oriented prosecutors have a key role to play in reducing crime, just as community-oriented police do – and they need federal funding and support, just as community oriented police do. Community prosecutors focus not just on closing cases and clearing dockets, but on reducing crime and improving the quality of life in the neighborhoods to which they are assigned. Hillary will allocate $250 million per year to help local district attorneys hire and train community prosecutors.
Federal support for other crime-fighting programs. Hillary will reverse the funding cuts to the Byrne Justice Assistant Grant program and restore funding to other DOJ local law enforcement assistance programs. Of course, all of these grants will be subject to audit by the Inspector General to prevent and deter waste, fraud and abuse. Hillary will also make permanent and fully fund the Bulletproof Vest Program.
Hillary will make major investments in a comprehensive set of initiatives that help at-risk kids get off on the right path, and stay there. Research has repeatedly proven that some of our most powerful policies to help reduce crime and violence focus on prevention. For example, a study of one high-quality after-school program found that boys left out of the program averaged six times more crimes than teens in the program. And over fifteen years, children who participated in the Nurse Family Partnership program experienced 69 percent fewer convictions at age 15. Hillary has already proposed significant early investments that will pay off in less crime over the long run, including:
Hillary will expand enforcement of and increase penalties for identity theft and other cybercrimes. She will:
Make it a federal crime to manufacture or distribute a controlled substance - including meth - that is colored, packaged, or otherwise altered in a way designed to appeal to kids and young people. Last year, the DEA reported that drug dealers are coloring meth crystals and giving them names like "Strawberry Quick." The crystals resemble "pop rocks" and other forms of candy. One goal of dealers is to try to lure in young customers "by making meth seem less dangerous." Hillary will sternly punish any dealer or trafficker of meth that colors, packages, or otherwise alters the drug to appeal to young people.
Direct the new Attorney General to conduct a 90-day review of all Deferred Prosecution Agreements and report to her on how to strengthen prosecution efforts against corporate wrongdoers. Over the last three years, the Justice Department has chosen to settle with more than 50 companies suspected of wrongdoing rather than press for a conviction. The New York Times describes this as a "major shift in policy." Under so-called deferred prosecution agreements, DOJ appoints an outside monitor to impose agreed-upon reforms at the company and the government collects fines. But the companies in question do not plead guilty and the charges against them are ultimately dismissed. The Bush administration has entered into agreements with companies ranging from American Express to KPMG to Merrill Lynch, dealing with crimes ranging from export control violations to Medicare fraud to environmental violations. Reliance on deferred prosecution agreements can weaken deterrence by leading companies to believe they can just cut a deal and make the criminal charges go away. And it suggests that the current administration is seeking to shelter wealthy and powerful entities from criminal prosecution. Hillary will direct her Attorney General to report to her on this practice, reduce its use, and increase the number of serious and meaningful prosecutions of corporate criminals. 
Now I know that like many places across the country, there's more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement. Just last month, I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer. And I understand an investigation is underway. Whatever the outcome, tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism.
The leaders went to war crimes tribunal, but others for whom there wasn't evidence or they played minor roles were actually elected. Well, you can imagine. So I go to the parliament and I speak about democracy and all the rest of it and take some pictures and do some visits afterwards, and I thought boy, we think we have it hard, here she is trying to work with a Congress that includes people who were mortal enemies with one another against her, against others, and she's working so hard to make this democracy what it should be against tremendous odds.
2. She worked to restore voting rights for those who had been convicted of a crime and served their sentences.
Hillary Clinton is standing up for our children and has a bold vision that protects them; eliminates the school-to-prison pipeline; improves our education system; and enhances the opportunities for women. Our economic and criminal justice systems remain stacked against the most vulnerable people in our society, and young men of color are the unfortunate recipients of these injustices. Our youth are our future and must be protected. In the Senate, Hillary Clinton sponsored legislation to ban racial profiling, prosecute hate crimes, and eliminate race-based disparities in our health care system. She is making progress.
That starts with being honest. Being unafraid to face the facts. Face the fact that black men are far more likely to be stopped, searched by police, charged with crimes and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for doing the same thing. We need to fix a system where too many black parents are taken from their kids and imprisoned for minor offenses. We need to make sure our police officers are trained in de-escalating tense situations. We need to dismantle the so-called school-to-prison pipeline, and instead invest in education from early childhood through high school into higher education. And yes we have got to fight for common sense reforms to stop the epidemic of gun violence in our communities.
He has said that he thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and des-pair. He has no idea -- no idea about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black-owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities.

And we saw that again in the way he treated the Central Park Five. These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14, who were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York City back in 1990. Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence.

And in addition, someone else confessed to the crime, so they were finally released from prison. But not only did Trump refuse to apologize for what he had said about them and even calling for their executions, he actually said, "They should still be in prison." Evidence didn't matter. The law didn't matter. To him, those kids would always be guilty.

Is this someone that we want to treat people the way he has demonstrated, his disrespect throughout this campaign. In a country that values, religious liberty and freedom. Someone who would ban every Muslim in the world from ever coming to our country. Someone who thinks the lives of black people are all crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea, none, about the strength of the black church, the vibrancy of black owned businesses, the excellence of historically black colleges and universities, the rise of a new generation of black activists for social justice and the success of black leaders in every field. Remember how he denied housing to Mae Brown Wiggins. And Mae wasn't alone. Whenever African Americans tried to rent an apartment, their application was marked with a "C" -- "C" for colored.

And then another recent example is the way Donald Trump treated what are called the "Central Park Five." These were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. Who, it turns out, were wrongly convicted of a terrible crime in New York back in 1990.

Donald Trump took out full-page ads in four newspapers calling for the death penalty for these kids. Nearly three decades later, they were exonerated by DNA evidence. Also, someone else confessed to the crime. So they were finally released from prison and justice was done, but not only did Donald Trump refuse to apologize for calling for their execution, he actually said they should still be in prison.

We will reform our criminal justice system from end to end. It is wrong. And I don't care whether you are black or white. It is wrong that black men are far more likely to be stopped by police, charged and sentenced to longer prison terms than white men for the same crimes. It's wrong, and we're going to do something about that. And Donald Trump, whenever he's face with these issues says "well the answer to our problems is more law and order." He doesn't tell you what he means by that, but it's kind of code for fear and division. What I think we need to do, is to work together to restore trust between our police and our communities.

If Donald wins the election, we'd have a president who wants to ban every Muslim in the world from coming to visit the United States. We are a country founded on religious freedom. That runs contrary to our Constitution. We would have a president who has said repeatedly that he thinks the lives of black people are all about crime and poverty and despair. He has no idea about the strength of the black church and the vibrancy of black-owned businesses and the excellence of historically black colleges and universities. He seems to know nothing about the rise of a new generation of black activists and the success of black leaders in every field. I think he needs a visit from Reverend Wendell Anthony, don't you?

He has such a casual disregard of our Constitution. He doesn't seem to understand the rule of law, that we really are a nation of laws, not men. Here's the latest example. There was a terrible crime back in 1990 in New York City. It was called the Central Park Five. Maybe some of you have heard of it. There were five black and Latino kids, some as young as 14. They were wrongfully convinced, and they were in prison where they spent years. Donald Trump took out full-page ads calling for the death penalty for the kids. And even after they were exonerated by DNA evidence and someone else confessed to that terrible crime, Trump actually said they should still be in prison. It doesn't matter if you're innocent. If he decides that you should be in prison or you should be locked up. No wonder he admired Vladimir Putin, because that's exactly what Putin does to his people.

Next, let's deal with the rising crime rate, put more police back on the street, fund them with federal dollars. We need to make sure we have 21st century schools for New Orleans. We know there were serious problems before Katrina, and let's set the goal of making New Orleans schools the best in the country.
Dinkins, New York City's first African-American Mayor, served as the 106th Mayor of the City of New York from 1990 to 1994. Among his many accomplishments was the institution of the widely praised "Safe Streets, Safe City" program, which hired thousands of new police officers and began the decline of crime rates in New York City. He established a system of after-school youth centers, Beacon Schools, and opened several Community Health Centers. Dinkins also led the fight to divest the City's $500 million dollars in pension funds invested in companies that did business with apartheid South Africa and worked to create an all civilian Police Oversight Board to review misconduct complaints.
"Senator Clinton has an excellent concept about how she plans to address issues surrounding crime and education. She described how she has partnered with leaders in New York to create a charter school specifically for African American men and notes that the Allen Cathedral AME Church charter school in Jamaica Queens, New York could be used as a model of how to help educate African American young men. Her mentioning of the school shows that she's aware of outstanding successful examples of education in this country. The way she addressed the need for the federal government to partner with inner cities suggests that she's not just focusing on international issues but that she's concerned with domestic ones - particularly crime and violence in our communities. I want a president who knows how to strike a balance between addressing international and domestic challenges facing this country," said Reverend Dr. Harold R. Mayberry, Senior Pastor of First African Methodist Episcopal Church and Chairperson of Network for Interfaith Action.
"Hillary Clinton has answers for the questions on how to revitalize our urban communities. Her approach to handling public safety, youth violence and crime is timely. She is relevant because she will implement a comprehensive healthcare, employment and economic development plan. Because of her experience, she can extend and expand upon both Bill Clinton's and Lyndon Johnson's initiatives," said Paul Cobb, Bay Area community leader and publisher of the Oakland Post.
Seventh, we need a renewed focus on law enforcement efforts on Native lands. It's simply outrageous that when American Indians are twice as likely to be victims of violent crimes, there are fewer than half as many police on tribal lands as non-tribal lands. And with the methamphetamine crisis affecting so many communities, the need for law enforcement resources in Indian Country is greater than ever.
"As funding for the COPS program has gone down, crime has gone up," Clinton said. "By boosting funding for community policing we can put more cops on the beat and make our communities safer."
With crime rising in cities across America, Clinton said she would more than double funding for Community Oriented Policing Systems (COPS) to Clinton administration levels of more than $1 billion. President Bush's proposed budget slashes COPS funding by 94%, from $541 million in 2007 to $34 million in 2008, and provides no money to hire new police officers.
Since it was created, the COPS program has funded nearly 118,000 officers in more than 13,000 communities. Between 1994 and 2001, due in part to the COPS grants, violent crime declined by 26 percent and the murder rate fell by 34 percent. An October 2005 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report concluded that for every dollar spent on COPS hiring per resident, crime fell by almost 30 incidents per 100,000 residents.
Comprehensive immigration reform: There are more than 12 million undocumented people currently living in the United States - that's nearly 1 in 20 workers - but we have no way to identify them or ensure that they are treated fairly in the workplace. She will provide a path to citizenship for those who have paid taxes and appropriate fines, learn English, have not committed crimes, and have been contributing members of our society. Hillary will also expand border security, maintain family reunification, create an agricultural guest worker program, eliminate the backlog of immigration applications, and capitalize on technological advances to streamline and expedite the system of entering the United States.
During the event, Senator Clinton discussed her agenda for a stronger America through job creation, quality education, health care for all and ending the war in Iraq. She outlined her plans to provide good jobs with good wages; encourage private sector investment and business growth in low-income areas; create more affordable housing in urban neighborhoods and ensure a strong federal-local partnership to fight crime.
Jeb Bush Opposes a Path to Citizenship. HANNITY: At one point you supported a path to citizenship. BUSH: Yes. HANNITY: You really – now you're saying a path to residency, no citizenship if you didn't respect our laws and sovereignty? BUSH: Yes. The plan that I proposed, and it's there for anybody that wants to read it. It's called "Immigration Wars." It's a book, you know, that I put out a couple years ago with Clint Bolick. The plan says you earn legal status. You get a provisional work permit. You don't receive government assistance. You pay a fine. You learn English. You don't receive any federal government assistance. And you work, you don't commit crimes. And over an extended period of time you earn legal status. You don't cut in front of someone who has been patiently waiting – HANNITY: Legal status but not citizenship. BUSH: Exactly. [Fox News, Hannity, 6/16/15]
This is just unsustainable, and we need to stand against it and I'm willing to take them on. Because I know that guns are at the root of so much of the crime and the danger that stalks our neighborhoods.
This is a hard path to walk, but I know we can do it. We've learned lessons. We have a lot that we now know especially when it comes to imprisoning low level offenders is not necessary to prevent crime on the streets. Let's focus on the bad actors that we don't want setting up crack houses again that you have to go and try to close or joining gangs that are so deadly people are dying across the streets in the country.
Now I know that like many places across the country, there's more work to do to increase trust between communities and law enforcement. Just last month, I know here a young African American man was fatally shot by a police officer. And I understand an investigation is underway. Whatever the outcome, tragedies like this raise hard questions about racial justice in America and put at risk efforts to build the community relationships that help keep us safe from crime and from terrorism.
