We've reinstated the Mexico City Policy, a longstanding policy. [Applause] Isn't that nice? And by the way, on Friday, a lot of people are going to be showing up to Washington, right, Mike? A lot of people. You know, the press never gives them the credit that they deserve. They'll have 300, 400, 500, 600,000 people; you won't even read about it. When other people show up you, read big time about it, right? So it's not fair, but nothing fair about the media. [Laughter] Nothing. A longstanding policy to ensure taxpayer dollars do not fund abortion services overseas.

Mr. Brown. Name is Louis Brown. I work for the Christ Medicus Foundation. I'm an attorney by training. In 2009, when the Affordable Care Act was going through Congress—what became the Affordable Care Act—I was working for the Democratic National Committee at the time. I resigned my position because I could tell that the Democratic bill that was going through Congress wanted to publicly fund abortion, and that's not something that I could go along with. So I resigned my position, later worked for Congressman Dan Lungren in Congress, and went on to eventually work for the Christ Medicus Foundation. And we're focused on building a culture of life, protecting religious liberty in health care, protecting the right of conscience, prohibiting the public funding of abortion, and also prohibiting nondiscrimination against pro-life medical providers.

Mr. Brown. ——gave several speeches in Michigan telling folks to vote pro-life in the general election, and really happy that you're here to continue the bipartisan belief that there should be no taxpayer funding of abortion, and also really to support your effort to show that the patient, the human person, should be at the center of our American health care system, not the Government. The Government has its place, but the patient should be the center. So I'm happy to support you, Mr. President.

As you all know, Roe vs. Wade has resulted in some of the most permissive abortion laws anywhere in the world. For example, in the United States, it's one of only seven countries to allow elective late-term abortions, along with China, North Korea, and others. Right now, in a number of States, the laws allow a baby to be born [torn; White House correction.] from his or her mother's womb in the ninth month. It is wrong; it has to change. Americans are more and more pro-life. You see that all the time. In fact, only 12 percent of Americans support abortion on demand at any time. Under my administration, we will always defend the very first right in the Declaration of Independence, and that is the right to life.

And during my first week in office, I reinstated a policy first put in place by President Ronald Reagan, the Mexico City policy. I strongly supported the House of Representative's Pain-Capable bill, which would end painful, late-term abortions nationwide. And I call upon the Senate to pass this important law and send it to my desk for signing. On the National Day of Prayer, I signed an Executive order to protect religious liberty. Very proud of that. Today I'm announcing that we have just issued a new proposal to protect conscience rights and religious freedoms of doctors, nurses, and other medical professionals. So important. I have also just reversed the previous administration's policy that restricted States' efforts to direct Medicaid funding away from abortion facilities that violate the law.

Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
Nearly every Democrat voted against a ban on late-term abortion, when unborn babies can feel the pain. The late-term abortion ban is commonsense policy, supported by almost two-thirds of the American people. But virtually every Democrat voted in lockstep against protecting these innocent lives.
When I ran for office, I pledged to stand for life. And as President, that's exactly what I've done. And I have kept my promise, and I think everybody here understands that fully. One of my very first acts as President was to reinstate the Mexico City Policy, to prevent taxpayer dollars from funding abortion centers overseas. It's a little reminiscent of Ronald Reagan. A few months later, with Marjorie in the Oval Office—she was sitting there with us, and she stood then and signed legislation to overturn the rule that forced States to fund abortion providers with taxpayer dollars. Marjorie was there with me.

My administration has also taken bold action to protect religious liberty. And today we are making another historic announcement. For decades, American taxpayers have been wrongfully forced to subsidize the abortion industry through Title X Federal funding. So today we have kept another promise. My administration has proposed a new rule to prohibit Title X funding from going to any clinic that performs abortions. [Applause] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much. We're also seeking passage of the 20-week abortion bill, which would end painful, late-term abortions nationwide. The House just passed the bill, but Democrats in the Senate are doing everything within their power to block it, although some are actually on our side. But they are working overtime to block it.

So the story is, '18 midterms—we need Republicans, and that will happen. On this issue, like so many other issues, the Democratic Party is far outside the American mainstream. Far outside. The United States is one of only seven countries in the world to allow elective abortions after 20 weeks, when unborn babies can truly feel the pain. Yet Democratic Senators like Jon Tester, Heidi Heitkamp, Claire McCaskill, Debbie Stabenow all voted against the 20-week bill and in favor of late-term abortion.

The President. Got to get out and vote. We are nine votes away from passing the 20-week abortion bill in the Senate, so we have to get them out there. The Democratic Senators are up for reelection in 10 States that I won by a lot. [Laughter] And I think we're doing very well. We have some of those folks that are running right now, and they're doing very, very well. Going to have a big, big surprise in 6 months. Big, beautiful surprise. [Laughter]

Reinstated the Mexico City policy we first put into place. And if you know, if you study it—and most of you know about this—first under President Ronald Reagan, not since then—the Mexico City policy. We proposed regulations to prevent title X taxpayer funding from subsidizing abortion. I was the first President to stand in the Rose Garden to address the March for Life. First one.

We have--we have two people running for the United States Senate on the Democrat Party. They love late-term abortion and they believe in gun control. [booing]
He co-sponsored legislation that provides late term abortion on demand. You know that. He backed a total government takeover of healthcare and he even sponsored legislation to provide free taxpayer funded healthcare to illegal aliens. Which I'm sure you love paying for that. [booing]
Espy supported one of the largest tax increases, you know this, in American history. He cosponsored legislation providing late-term abortion on demand. And he sponsored legislation to provide free government health care to illegal aliens at your expense. [booing]
THE DAILY CALLER: Another thing, sir, Virginia Gov. [Ralph] Northam actually right before this, suggested a mother who wants to have an abortion while in labor should instead be allowed to let her baby die after delivery if that's her choice. Do you think that would be infanticide?
THE DAILY CALLER: Do you think this is an embrace by the Democrats of this type of abortion agenda?
To defend the dignity of every person, I am asking Congress to pass legislation to prohibit the late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in the mother's womb. Let us work together to build a culture that cherishes innocent life. And let us reaffirm a fundamental truth: All children—born and unborn—are made in the holy image of God.
Democrats are also pushing extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Allowing children to be ripped from their mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. What's that all about? [booing]
Incredible. Millions of innocent beautiful babies are counting on us to protect them, and we will. [cheers and applause] That is why last week I go I called on Congress, with your great congressman over there—thank you, fellas—to immediately pass legislation prohibiting extreme late-term abortion. [cheers and applause] And that certainly is extreme. Many people never even heard of it. I mean, have you ever even hear of anything like this?
They're becoming the party of socialism, late-term abortion, open borders, and crime. [booing] This weekend, some Democrats even proposed a measure that would force the release of thousands of criminal illegal aliens—[booing]—including dangerous felons convicted of rape, sex trafficking, violent assault, and even murder, into our country. Can you believe this? [booing]
Sadly, on immigration and so many other issues, Democrat lawmakers have totally abandoned the American mainstream. But that's going to be good for us in 2020. They're embracing open borders, socialism, and extreme late-term abortion.
Just this week, Senate Democrats opposed legislation to prevent the killing of newborn infant children who survive abortions. Virtually every Democrat voted against protecting these precious babies. Every one. They vote in groups.
In recent months the Democrat party has also been aggressively pushing extreme late-term abortion, allowing children [booing] -- to be ripped from their mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. And now we go a step further in Virginia. The Governor stated that he would even allow a newborn baby--wrap the baby up, make the baby comfortable--to be executed [booing] after birth. That is why in my State of the Union Address I called on Congress to immediately pass legislation prohibiting the extreme late-term abortion of babies. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat Party has never been further outside of the mainstream. They are being brought so far left you wouldn't like it folks. You wouldn't like it. You won't be happy. Radical Democrats are the party of high taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, crime, hoaxes, and delusions.
And they are aggressively pushing extreme late-term abortion, [booing] allowing children to be ripped from their mothers womb right up until the moment of birth. And just this week, your Democrat governor, and by the way, [booing] by the way we have Scott Walker, he's here. [cheers and applause] Great governor, he did a great job, he's a great governor. He's got a big future.
But your Democrat governor here in Wisconsin shockingly stated that he will veto legislation that protects Wisconsin babies born alive, [booing] born alive. The baby is born. The mother meets with the doctor. They take care of the baby, they wrap the baby beautifully. And then the doctor and the mother determine whether or not they will execute the baby.[booing] I don't think so. Incredible. No, it's incredible. Until this crazy man in Virginia said it, nobody even thought of that, right? Did anyone even think of that? Yeah, late term. But this is where the baby is actually born, it came out, it's there, it's wrapped and that's it. [booing] Who believes it? So to protect innocent life, I called on Congress to immediately pass legislation prohibiting the extreme late-term abortion of babies. [cheers and applause]
So, Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, hoaxes, and delusions.
And Democrats are aggressively pushing late-term abortion—[booing]—allowing children to be ripped from their mother's womb right up until the moment of birth.
And then you have this Governor in Virginia, you saw that. The baby is born, and you wrap the baby beautifully and you talk to the mother about the possible execution of the baby [booing]. Oh, can't do that. So, who heard of that one? And that came up and that's now something, and they don't even want to discuss it, they don't even want to discuss it. And to protect innocent life, I called on Congress to immediately pass legislation prohibiting extreme late-term abortion. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, witch hunts, and delusions. The Republican Party is the party for all Americans. We want to make America great again. That's what we're doing. [cheers and applause]
The President. Well, I put out my position on the—on abortion. You've known it for a long time. But I put it out the other day. You have it. I feel strongly about it. And all of that is working its way through court, along with the fact that the Democrats are talking about third term, and they're really talking about beyond third term, and that's a terrible thing.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
KARL: Has -- has -- do you think Biden has sufficiently answered the question on the Hyde amendment, which -- which bans federal funds for abortion? He had supported it year after year after year, now he says he's against it. Does that close the case for that?
The Hyde amendment isn't about abortion per se. The Hyde amendment is -- is truly about equality of health care and health care access for low-income women and women of color and women that get caught in our -- in our mass incarceration system. And so the Hyde amendment is -- is about income inequality and it's about women's healthcare in a system of income inequality. So I think that we need to repeal it. I think that -- that having that -- a strong record, I think all of this is stuff for voters to decide. But I think that we really -- this is not in the niche topic of women's issues anymore, this is an American issue.
And President Trump kept his word, when he's appointed more principled conservatives to our federal courts in the last two years than any President in American history. [Cheering.] And they are all men and women who will uphold all of the God-given liberties enshrined in our Constitution, like the freedom of religion, the freedom of speech, and the second amendment right to keep and bear arms. [Cheering.] And while leading voices in the Democratic Party advocate late term abortion and eveb defend infanticide. . .  [Booing.]. . .I couldn't be more proud to serve alongside a President who stands without apology for the sanctity of human life. [Cheering.]
THE PRESIDENT: Republicans do not believe in socialism, we believe in freedom, and so do you. [Applause.]  We will defend Medicare and Social Security for our great seniors. We will defend it like nobody else. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions, always. Always. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports taxpayer-funded abortion right up to the moment of birth, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. Leading Democrats have even opposed measures to prevent the execution of children after birth. You saw that. . . in Virginia. [Booing.]
Republicans believe that every life is a sacred gift from God. [Applause.] That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion.
TIME: Going back to kind of a health care question. Do you support the Alabama abortion law that was recently passed?
Unfortunately, Democrat politicians have become increasingly hostile to pro-life Americans who want to help more children find a loving home and share their dreams with the world. Virtually every top Democrat lawmaker now supports taxpayer-funded abortion, right up to the moment of birth.

So that becomes an execution. That becomes an execution. Every child born and unborn is made in the holy image of God, and that is why I have asked Congress to prohibit the late-term abortion of babies. And they'll do that. [Applause] Thank you.

The President. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. During my first week in office, I reinstated the Mexico City policy. People thought that wasn't going to be happening. We've issued a final rule to prohibit Title X taxpayer funding from subsidizing the abortion industry. And just last month, our administration ended Federal funding of fetal tissue research. All of us working to foster a culture that celebrates the sacred worth of every human life.

The choice of our future has never been clearer. The radical left offers a vision of socialism, censorship, high taxes, open borders and extreme late-term abortion. Our movement is about lifting up all Americans. We're fighting for the American worker, we're fighting for the American family, and we're fighting for the American Dream.

Ms. Rose. I represent Live Action. I'm the founder and president, and we are a pro-life organization which reaches millions of people every week with the truth about abortion and human dignity.

And then, recently, our videos have been viewed more highly than almost any other abortion-related content on YouTube. But YouTube—we made it to the first page of search results, but YouTube buried our pro-life videos and boosted pro-abortion videos. So this double standard and bias is a growing problem in big tech, even though they say that they are politically neutral and they don't discriminate. They even testified before Congress and said that.

Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, [booing] right up until the moment of birth.
Republicans believe that every life is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause] And that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion of babies.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, intolerance and division.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion. [booing] And then you’ll have like a governor of Virginia, it’s not only late term abortion, it’s killing the baby after the baby is born. How about that? [booing] Think of that. Think of that. That’s why I’ve asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, and they’re the party, frankly, of socialism. [booing]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother’s womb. [booing] Right up, up till . . .  Right up until the moment of birth. And in the case of the Virginia Governor, he’s having a rough, rough time. In his case, the baby is born, and then he goes to talk to the mother. The doctor talks to the mother. The baby is now born, wrapped, as he said, and then they decide whether or not to execute the baby. [booing]  Who would believe that.
That is why I’ve asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause]  Hard to believe, isn’t it?
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion and socialism. [booing]
The other Dan, he supports Nancy Pelosi's agenda—[booing]—of higher taxes, fewer jobs, open borders, and even sanctuary counties. And you know Dan McCready even opposed a bill to protect the lives of babies who survive abortion. [booing]
We'll always protect patients with preexisting conditions also. Always, yep, my word. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 51 years. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion. [booing]
Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth, and if you look at Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, he was even talking about essentially you would say an execution. He was talking after the baby is born, the doctor will talk to the mother and they'll make the decision as to whether or not that baby lives. This is a radical Democrat idea. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. They're socialists. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. Every day they're making good on the motto, "promises made, promises kept." In fact, we are keeping even more promises by far than we made, or than we promised. So many more. So many more. So many more.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mothers right up until the moment of birth, and that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] It's true. Right? I see it. Just like mom, I see it.
The President. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it is the party of the American dream. [cheers and applause] We've achieved record funding for the US military. All of that money, trillions and trillions of dollars spent, all produced right here in the good old USA. [cheers and applause] And I have to tell you, New Mexico, I know you're gonna like this. A lot of those trillions because you know when you do the 716 and the 730 and the 700 billion, all of a sudden you're in trillions and I can save a lot of lines when I just say trillions. A lot of that money's going to be spent in the state-of-the-art military equipment that's being used at Holloman Air Force Base, White Sands Missile Range—[cheers and applause]—Kirkland Air Force Base, and many other vital New Mexico military installations that are going up as we speak.
Americans will also never tire of defending innocent life. We are aware that many United Nations projects have attempted to assert a global right to taxpayer-funded abortion on demand, right up until the moment of delivery. Global bureaucrats have absolutely no business attacking the sovereignty of nations that wish to protect innocent life. Like many nations here today, we in America believe that every child—born and unborn—is a sacred gift from God.
I am a Cuban American, and it saddens me that Cuban Americans and African Americans, even though we're a minority, we—I'm sorry, Hispanics and African Americans are the minority, yet we form the majority of abortions in our country. One out of two pregnancies of African Americans ends up in abortion, and one out of three Hispanic pregnancies ends up in abortions. And that saddens me. And on behalf of Heartbeat of Miami and the pro-life movement, we want to thank you for what to you do for life. Our President does stand for life, life of the unborn and all lives. And I just want to thank you for that, Mr. President.

Ms. Avila. We—over 3,000 pregnancy clinics throughout the Nation, with very limited resources, are doing this labor of love for those that don't know what to do. They're confused. They don't have a way out, and they think that abortion is the only solution. Yet we offer them the opportunity to parent their babies and the opportunity of a plan of adoption. That is what we do.

So pregnancy clinics are good for America. And one day, abortion will be unthinkable—unthinkable in our country. So God bless you all. God bless you both. Thank you so much.

And that's more can you can say for those do-nothing Democrats in Washington D.C. I mean, the truth is the Democratic Party has been taken over by radical leftists who want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialist policies that would crush our economy. And worst of all, today's Democrats have spent the last three years trying to overturn the will of the American people in the last election. And they're back at it again. But despite three years of non-stop resistance and investigations and obstruction by the Democrats and the media, I'm here to tell you President Donald Trump has never stopped fighting to keep the promises that he made to the people of Minnesota, and he never will. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant Washington corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it's the party of the American Dream. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports, late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up to the moment of birth. That's why, I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party–the American worker, the American family and the American dream, that's what they want. Republicans want the American dream. [applause]
Virtually every top Democrat lawmaker also now supports taxpayer-funded abortion, right up to the moment of birth. But it's really now even worse than that. The Governor of Virginia—do you remember? He was on a show, and he talked. People said: "What did you say? What was that?"

But I was talking, and I was going off fact after fact after fact about how crooked and corrupt the media is. Then, I realized: I'm in the Oval Office. And I said, "But I'm President, and you're not, so what's this all about?" [Laughter] Right? It's true. I'm saying, I'm going on for like 20 minutes, ranting and raving. And then, I said: "Wait a minute, here I am. Here I am. The Resolute Desk—here it is. It's right there." [Laughter] And I walked away with a big smile on my face. [Laughter] But because of the late-term abortion—this is why I've asked Congress to prohibit the late-term abortion of babies, and it's a big thing and had a lot of fighting. You wouldn't think there would be a lot of fighting.

In this administration, we believe every child, born and unborn, is made in the holy image of God. During my first week in office, I reinstated the Mexico City Policy to protect the lives of the unborn. We have issued a final rule to prohibit title X taxpayer funding from subsidizing the abortion industry. We stopped Federal funding of fetal tissue research.

Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that crackpot governor from Virginia executes the baby after birth. You saw that, right? After birth. You remember that one from last year. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of crazy politicians, high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. They're corrupt, like Schiff is corrupt. He's corrupt. [shouting]
The President. ... more advantages than our own citizens have, more advantages than our own military has. [booing] Jim Hood wants to raise your taxes. He supports taxpayer funding for abortion providers. [booing] He supports illegal immigration, all benefits, and he opposed our travel ban, which is so important that we won in the United States Supreme Court to keep terrorists the hell out of our country. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. Well, the governor of Virginia executed a baby. Remember that whole thing? After birth, after birth. Some people never heard of it. He said the baby is born and then he starts talking to the mother. Nobody ever heard that. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream. Nobody has done more for the African-American community than the Republican party. [cheers and applause] And we're also the party of Abraham Lincoln. We can't forget that. People forget. Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
I got you choice too. If you don't like your job, you find another one. You tell the boss, "Hey, I'm getting out of here, I don't like this guy." You go get a better job for more money. Beshear doesn't represent you. He represents the Washington swamp and he's backed by the same people trying to overthrow the last election. [shouting] Beshear supported Crooked Hillary Clinton, and he's funded by the pro-abortion lobby and open borders fanatics. Open borders, let everyone pour right in. Let them all pour right in. Beshear wants to bring sanctuary cities to Kentucky, think of that one. [cheers and applause] Releasing violent criminals and aliens to terrorize innocent Kentucky families. He wants sanctuary cities. He hasn't learned what's happened.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from their mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [booing] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and it's the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. We forgot that. Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] The incredible rebuilding of our military includes over 100 billion-dollar investments all across the state of Kentucky.
Edwards is backed by his fellow open border extremists and pro-abortion lobby. Edwards is a complete disaster for the state of Louisiana, and you cannot afford four more years of this far-left travesty. It is time to replace your failed Governor John Bel Edwards with Eddie Rispone, who is going to do an incredible job. [applause]
It was a lie. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in over 50 years. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment —[booing]— right up to the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. It's also the party of the late great Abraham Lincoln, people forget. We have confirmed already 158 incredible judges to interpret the Constitution as written, including two great Supreme Court Justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. [applause]
I don't think Schiff plays very well down here. He's controlled by the same extremists who are pushing the impeachment witch hunt. And John Bel Edwards, if he gets ever involved in that, he's going to push it like hell. And I'sh—honestly-- I didn't, I didn't have to be down 'ere--all I do is make enemies 'cause if he wins, I got another enemy. What the hell difference does it make? I have so many. But then I have an enemy in Louisiana. I don't want that, and you need a Republican here. Everyone's Republican. You need a Republican, not a Democrat. [cheers and applause] It's one of the reasons he gets nothing done. He's a chosen candidate. Think of this, John Bel. He wants open borders. [booing] He wants radical pro-abortion policies, and he loves the fake news media. I hear they treat him great. They love 'im. You know why they love 'im? Because he does what they want, and what they want is exactly the opposite of what you want. We know that.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. They're corrupt. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
Can you imagine this? That's because our system is all screwed up. So, I say go to Canada, buy 'em and it'll change watch what happens, watch what happens with the drugs, but I'm giving Florida and I'm giving some other states we're giving Florida, though the right to go and buy at a much lower price—[applause]—virtually every top Democrat also supports late term abortion ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing]
That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God [cheers and applause]. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream and remember this the Republican Party is the party of Abraham Lincoln. We forget. Abraham Lincoln, and I've always heard that the most important thing a President can do is the appointment of judges. I say maybe the military, because without the military we're not so interested in judges, right. So, I think maybe the military, but we've done a great job with that totally rebuild.
Republicans will defend your sacred right to choose the doctor, and you can choose your plan, and you choose the plan that's right for you. We will strongly protect patients with preexisting conditions. We will also protect your right to get the physician that you want. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. And this character in Virginia. Did you see the Virginia governor? [booing] I mean, he gave a whole expose. The baby is born, and then basically, they start talking to the mother. The baby is born. And there's no other word. If the mother decides no, then they execute the baby. Okay? He's the governor of Virginia and why the Republicans aren't going to win Virginia this next election, 2020. I'll tell you what, we're going to give it a very strong shot. When you have people like that, we're going to give it a very strong shot. But that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion. Because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the party of honest Abe Lincoln. [applause] Party of Abe Lincoln.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb—[booing]—right up until the moment of birth. Right? That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. And that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. And that's really what it is. We're also the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. A lot of people forget that, but we have to bring it up. To protect the health and safety of our citizens, we awarded $100 million to improve water infrastructure in Flint. How badly was Flint? Who was, who were the geniuses that did that to you? You have clean water coming into Flint. They had to pay a very tiny little fee. So, instead, they go into this horrible, horrible, really polluted water and the water comes out of there. They spend hundreds of millions of dollars to save like a couple of bucks, and the water was so terrible, and it hurt the people. It hurt the people. But we're getting it fixed. And I know your previous governor was a Republican, but I was not a big fan of his. I was not, but I'm not a big fan of the one that can't fix the potholes either.
The Vice President. And four more years means more jobs. Four more years means more judges. Four more years means more support for our troops. [cheers and applause] And it's gonna take at least four more years to drain that swamp. [cheers and applause] You know, the choice in this election couldn't be clearer. The stakes couldn't be higher. Today we have a president who loves this country, who stands by our military, our workers, and our freedom. He never quits, he never backs down. He believes in you and fights for you every single day. [cheers and applause] And the contrast is, today's Democratic party's been taken over by radical leftists—[booing]—who want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialist policies that would crush this economy. And worst of all, after a sham investigation, those do-nothing Democrats in Congress actually voted to impeach our president. [booing] They rushed their partisan impeachment through the House, remember, they said it was urgent. And now Nancy Pelosi's been sitting on those articles of impeachment for almost a month. [shouting] It's a disgrace.
Republicans will defend middle class taxpayers and the right to keep the doctor of your choice. We will protect patients with pre-existing conditions. And we will protect your pre-existing physician. [cheers and applause] You'll have your physician. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Radical Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the party of the American dream. We still have that American dream. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, [booing] ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
But they're the party of late term abortion, socialism and corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American Dream, and of course, honest Abe Lincoln, right? Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. We are a movement. There's a movement like nobody's ever seen before. You know, when I mention this, anything I say that's even slightly false, [gestures toward media] it's headlines. "Trump said this." These people! He said this. This is one of the greatest—I would say this. This is the greatest movement in the history of our country, I really believe that. Never been a movement like this. [cheers and applause] Right?
The President. Well, I have a great relationship with Catholics. I've done so much for Catholics. You take look at the abortion issue. You take a look at many of these—you have Mexico City; you take a look at so many of the different issues. My relationship with Catholics and the Catholic Church has been very, very good, as you know very well.

The President. Together, we are the voice for the voiceless. When it comes to abortion, Democrats is a—and you know this, you've seen what's happened—Democrats have embraced the most radical and extreme positions taken and seen in this country for years and decades and—you can even say—"for centuries."

The President. Nearly every top Democrat in Congress now supports taxpayer-funded abortion, all the way up until the moment of birth.

Senate Democrats even blocked legislation that would give medical care to babies who survive attempted abortions. And that's why I've called on Congress—two of our great Senators here, so many of our Congressmen here—I called upon them to defend the dignity of life and to pass legislation prohibiting late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in their mother's womb.

Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion. [booing] Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. Look at what's happening to their cities. Los Angeles, it's so sad. What you see is so sad with the homeless and the way they don't take care of the homeless. San Francisco, you could take a ... Starting in New York. You could take a look at what's happening to our cities run by Democrats. It's a disaster. They don't know what the hell they're doing. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
I mean, I don't have to tell you here in Iowa, you see it every day. Today's Democrat party has been taken over by radical leftists. They want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and openly advocate socialist policies that would crush this economy. [shouting] And worst of all, after three years of endless investigations, the Democrats in Congress actually voted to impeach our president. [booing] They sent those articles of impeachment to the Senate, where they are being considered even as we speak. [shouting] You know, what the Democrats in Washington are doing in the Senate is a disgrace. [shouting] They rushed their partisan impeachment through the House in a shameful attempt to overturn the will of the American people.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up until the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. No matter how you cut it, that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. You know that, right? Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Our goal should be to ensure that every baby has the best chance to thrive and grow just like Ellie. That is why I'm asking Congress to provide an additional $50 million to fund neonatal research for America's youngest patients. That is why I'm also calling upon Members of Congress here tonight to pass legislation finally banning the late-term abortion of babies. Whether we are Republican, Democrat, or Independent, surely we must all agree that every human life is a sacred gift from God.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? Abraham Lincoln. [applause]
We've launched bold new initiatives combating kidney disease and Alzheimer's disease. We're making tremendous progress, and we're pursuing new advances in neonatal research. Think of that, neonatal research, the numbers are incredible. What's happened is incredible, to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in doing so. All of the radical Democrats in the presidential debates have declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. [booing] That is why in my State of the Union, I asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total destruction of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, the Second Amendment, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? [cheers and applause] Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background, every community, and every walk of life. We are the party of boundless optimism, excitement, energy, and enthusiasm. We have tremendous energy. Tremendous energy. [cheers and applause]
All of the radical Democrats in the presidential debates have declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the very moment of birth. You know that. That is why at my State of the Union, I asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion for babies—[cheers and applause]—because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. That's what it is. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] People forget that. People forget Honest Abe. He's the most presidential guy, right? I've always said I could be more presidential than anybody, but I'm not sure I can beat Honest Abe when he wears the hat. That hat is too much. It's so easy to be presidential, so easy. It's so much easier than doing what I have to do, but you know what I'd have? I'd have about three people in the front row. [laughter]
We're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in so doing. Virtually every Democrat candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause] The Democrat Party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and of course the late, great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
Democrats have declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth.
The President. And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because every child is a sacred gift from God. Thank you.
We are combating the opioid epidemic. Drug overdose deaths have declined for the first time in nearly 31 years. [cheers and applause] Big problem. And we've launched new initiatives combating kidney disease and Alzheimer's, and we're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients, and breaking all records in so doing. [cheers and applause] Virtually every Democratic candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the very moment of birth. How about that? That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause]
The Democratic party is the party of high taxes, high crime, unlimited regulations, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
And look what happened to Biden in Ukraine where his son's paid 83,000 a month and he was jobless. Give me a break. Eighty-three thousand a month. More than anybody. If Joe Biden were to become president an emboldened left will launch a full-scale assault on American life. You know that. They'll expel anyone who disagrees with them. Look what happens when you disagree. You use a term that's perfect and they're not happy with it. They call you a racist. They call you a horrible person. [shouting] They wanna crush religious liberty, they don't want religion, silence religious believers, indoctrinate your children with hateful and vicious lies about our country, subsidize late-term abortion and after-birth execution. [booing]
Audience members. Boo! Ms. Moore. I was told by the faculty that political groups were not welcome on campus. However, they had multiple leftist groups that supported Black—the Black Lives Matter movement, they were pro-abortion——

Give free healthcare to illegal aliens. You don't get free healthcare? Expand deadly sanctuary cities. Force taxpayers to subsidize late-term abortion. Shut down the energy fields of Pennsylvania. They want to shut them down. No fossil fuel. No fossil fuel. Texas isn't too happy, either. Go to Texas. I just left Texas a little while ago, two weeks. I said, they don't want energy, they don't want guns, and they don't want religion. A guy stands up, says, "Not going to win Texas!" But you have the same thing, because you do a big, you're a big fracking state. You want to see your taxes go up? Stop fracking. Doesn't hurt you at all, fracking. They want to throw up windmills that are going to ruin your houses. I mean, put up a big windmill. You walk out your door. You'll see those big monsters churning. But even that they don't want to do. I don't think they want to do anything. I think they want to close your businesses. But just remember, Second Amendment. They're going to take it away. As sure as you're sitting or standing. They're going to take it away from you. The Second Amendment. Don't let it happen.
There's now a major American political party that supports decriminalizing illegal border crossings, abolishing cash bail. If you kill somebody, no bail. They want to close all prisons, outlaw American energy, confiscate your guns, force taxpayers to finance late-term abortion. They want to ban charter schools, abolish school choice, destroy our beautiful suburbs.

Great people. Great, great people. Joe Biden claims he has empathy for the vulnerable. Yet the party he leads supports the extreme late-term abortion of defenseless babies right up until the moment of birth.
Radical Justices will erase the Second Amendment, silence political speech, and require taxpayers to fund extreme late-term abortion. They will give unelected bureaucrats that power to destroy millions of American jobs. They will remove the words "under God" from the Pledge of Allegiance. They will unilaterally declare the death penalty unconstitutional, even for the most depraved mass murderers. They will erase national borders, cripple police departments, and grant new protections to anarchists, rioters, violent criminals, and terrorists.

Joe Biden would be- [cheers and applause] So Joe Biden would be a disaster for all communities, not just the Hispanic community. He's pledged to wage attacks on Catholic organizations, like the Little Sisters of the Poor that we're helping. And we're winning with them. We're helping them. They got hit so hard by O'Biden. They got hit so hard. [laughter] I remember them in the Supreme Court, the Little Sisters of the Poor. They get hit by Biden. And then he says, "How wonderful." He's such a wonderful person. He supports taxpayer-funded extreme late-term abortion. And I mean ninth month, ninth month, ninth month.
The Democrats and Biden would be a disaster for Hispanic Americans. He's pledged to wage attacks on Catholic organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor. They're fighting him. He supports taxpayer-funded extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Extreme late-term. He would allow left-wing anarchists to burn down your businesses. He would hand over your jobs to China, and your country to the socialists and beyond the socialists. [booing] The Democrat party also continues to attack our incredible border agents, more than half of whom happen to be Hispanic Americans, okay? And they're great. And I wanna thank not only law enforcement, but a big part of law enforcement, the Border Patrol and the ICE agents, they're incredible. [cheers and applause]
And he supports taxpayer-funded extreme late-term abortion and he supports it very strongly. Late-term and even after-term, if you think, if you look at the Governor of Virginia, he said, "The baby is born." And then really, I guess you call that an execution because we're not even talking about during term, we're talking about after-term abortion and Biden doesn't wanna take a position on that.
Caminero. American goods are more expensive but they're better. I started in the furniture industry when I was 21 years old and I used to sell things that were American made, Mexican made, Canadian made, things that you could pass on. Now, everything is disposable, everything. Life is disposable. Look at how, how they think that late-term abortion is okay. It's not okay. You know. So this election, as far as I can see it, I'm gonna be 57 years old in a couple of months, is the most important election, at least, in my lifetime because of what you symbolize. And I thank you for putting America first.
Under Biden, Democrats will wipe out every single victory the pro-life movement has achieved, and we've achieved plenty, and allow, and fully allow infants to be ripped out of their mother's wombs. We talked about it in the last debate or one of the debates with Crooked Hillary Clinton and, uh, late-term, we talked late-term, but this is far beyond late-term abortion. This is a terrible thing.
So you have a governor between that and between, uh, the Second Amendment. Uh, they are coming after you, and I think we should win Virginia. If I can't, we can't win Virginia, I don't know, I would be very surprised. A lot of people agree with me, by the way. When I'm re-elected, I will work with the Republican Congress to ban extreme late-term abortion because every child is a sacred gift of God. And that's the way it is.
So I wanna just thank you all. It's so important. Some people would say, "Well, save your time. Don't go to Virginia. Democrats have sort of taken—the radical left has, a little bit, taken over Virginia." I don't believe it. You have an incompetent governor. You have a governor that's gonna take away your guns and what he's done to, to—against pro-life, what he's done in terms of abortion, what he's done in terms of execution after birth, babies' execution after birth, I just hope you can see to it, vote for Donald Trump.
But they wanna ban all prayer in public schools and require taxpayers to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Biden's justices will erase national borders, they don't want borders, protect sanctuary cities, and compel the unlimited entry of foreign nationals. And if you look at some of these jihadist nations, no thank you. Somebody said, "That's not nice. That's not politically correct." I said, "That's okay." They'll cripple the police departments, free violent criminals, shield foreign terrorists, and declare the death penalty unconstitutional, even for the most depraved mass murderers who kill women and children. That's what they want. They don't want any death penalty. Not for the Boston Bomber, not for anybody. You see the Boston Bomber, they're still trying this guy, what he did to so many lives. He ruined, killed people, ruined so many families, ruined so many lives. In three— And by the way, they want the Boston Bomber to be able to vote. You know that. [booing]
Every time you complain, remember it was Harry Reid, your person in charge. He had your job before. It was Harry Reid who made this all possible. Thank you very much, Harry. I hope you're enjoying your evening. [cheears and applause] No, they blame us. Harry Reid gave us the power, nuclear option. Thank you Harry, very much. But he wants to pack the court, Supreme Court, with radicals who will terminate the Second Amendment, confiscate your firearms, eliminate the right to self defense, strike "under God" from the pledge of allegiance and all other places—[booing]—tear down crosses from public spaces, and force taxpayers to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing]
The President. I don't forget things. Thank you. [cheers and applause] I don't forget things. Where are the pastors that got up? Where are they? Where are they? Where are those guys? Man, oh man. [cheers and applause] I'll never follow you again. At least we had Herschel in between, right? [laughter] And Herschel didn't like it either. That was really great. Thank you both. Thank you all very much. That was beautiful. That was from the heart and we appreciate it. We won't forget. We won't forget. I will fiercely defend the vital role of Black churches in America. [cheers and applause] Joe Biden and the Democrats say that Black lives matter but they do not protect the most vulnerable Black lives of all: unborn children. [cheers and applause] They support the unlimited abortion of Black children right up until the ninth month of pregnancy. And if you look at this governor of Virginia, beyond, I had not heard that. But if you look at the governor of Virginia, he said, "The baby is born, and then they start to talk."
I said, "Wait a minute, that's not abortion. That's, that's not abortion." You know what that is? No, it's, it's, I call it, I call it execution.
The President. You've seen that, right? I had not heard that. You hear "late-term abortion." You never heard that. But the governor of Virginia, the one that thinks he's Michael Jackson—[laughter]—the one whose wife stopped him, whose wife from trying to imitate Michael Jackson moonwalking. Now one thing we know, he's not gonna be Michael. There's no, there's nobody, there's nobody that can moonwalk like Michael. See. He got very lucky. That would have been the end if he would've done that. But the Democrats champion Planned Parenthood, an organization founded on racism that continues to target the Black community. In the Republican party, we believe in protecting all Black lives, including the unborn. We believe that every child, of every race, born and unborn, is made in the holy image of God. [cheers and applause] Republicans believe that all human life is sacred.
If I weren't president, you wouldn't have a Second Amendment right now. And Biden does it. Nobody's talks about life anymore, pro-life. Is he pro-life? No, he's not pro-life. What is he? Why don't you ask him that question? He doesn't want to talk about it. But he endorsed a Governor of Virginia who not only executed a baby late term abortion, but executed a baby because he said the baby can be born and then you can kill the baby. He's totally in favor of that. I can tell you, your pro-life groups are… They're in mess. This is their one shot because what's going on is so bad.

It's so evil. The governor of Virginia said, we will execute the baby after the baby is born, that's… When you talk about late term abortion, this is early term execution, and it's a very, very bad thing. But you don't ever hear everybody talking about pro-life, pro-choice with Biden. Did you ever hear it? I haven't heard it. Very rarely do you hear it? I don't think he'd know how to discuss it. But very importantly, a Second Amendment. They just don't discuss the Second Amendment. He's going to take your guns away. So everybody with a gun, you can't vote for him because you're not going to have your gun. At the same time, they want to defund the police.

They said, "We'd like to give Savannah Guthrie—" I said, "That's all right. What difference does it make?" They ask you a question, you give them an answer. Right? It doesn't matter. But she was sort of jumping out of her seat. She was like flying. She was like, "I told you. I told you." I said, "I don't care what you told me. What does that mean?" No. We actually got eight plus marks on that. But it was very unfair. Then you watch Sleepy Joe get interviewed by George Stephanopoulos. Nice guy, but he's a tough guy. And he's tough. I interviewed with him two weeks ago. He was tough. He's giving these lobs in slow motion, lobs. No, it's unfair, but you know what? It's so unfair and we're President and they're not, but that's our own. [applause] We are. We are. But they want to fund extreme, late-term abortion. They want to pack—[booing] You got to get out and vote. You got to get out and vote. Got to get out and vote.
But they want to destroy the sanctity of the Supreme Court, the importance of the Supreme Court, the majesty of the Supreme Court. They'll terminate religious liberty, cancel free speech, and force you to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing] And there will be nothing to stop them. If they don't get in, there's going to be nothing to stop them. You have no idea how bad it will be. There will be nothing. I used to argue with certain people about the filibuster. I said, look, I don't like it either, but I do it because I know they are going to do it. And everybody said, "Oh, they'll never do it." They're doing it. They've already announced they're going to do it. That means they can do anything they want. And, you know, the Republicans, they play a different game. I don't know, maybe they love the country more. But they said, "No, no, they'll never do it." And I said, "Well Schumer, he'll do it the first day he gets in, he'll do it." And that's exactly what's happening, and he'll do it. And he will do that to the Supreme Court, there's no question. But they look forward to it because you know why? We put on three—think of this, three great justices and—[applause]—and—we'll be over 300 federal judges in the United States, which will be a record. Three hundred, three hundred. And they don't want to wait, they want to do it very quickly. "Let's just vote and we'll take it." This takes years and years and years to slowly change a court and perhaps I got a little bit lucky to get three. A lot of presidents have had none. They've never had—they stay on for a long time, they're young when they go on and they're old when they come off. But the fact is a lot of presidents, good presidents, great presidents—they say you can't be a great president unless you've put in Supreme Court Justices. They say it's the single most important thing a president can do. And I'm not sure that's right, I think military defense, military offense, frankly, is the most important thing. [applause] But it's certainly one of the most important things you can do. And the fact that I have more than—I will have by the end, more than 300—first term, think of it. And if we do a second term, which I hope we do, we could have close to 540. [applause] But the fact that I had three Supreme Court Justices in the first term is not making them feel too good.
Marjorie Taylor Greene. Hello, Northwest Georgia. All right. Let me tell you something. I'm so fired up to hear Senator Kelly Loeffler. She's going to object on January 6th. [cheers and applause] Yeah! This is, this is why I believe in her. You see, when you have a strong Senator Kelly Loeffler from Georgia fighting for you, and fighting for your President, and protecting your vote, this is why you have to turn out tomorrow, right? [cheers and applause] Yes. We have to save our Senate sets—Senate seats. We have to save America and stop socialism. This is the last line. We aren't gonna hand over our Senate seats to a pastor who preaches abortion from the pulpit. [booing] No. He's, he's preaching murder of God's creation in the womb, holding a Bible in his hand.
Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
Nearly every Democrat voted against a ban on late-term abortion, when unborn babies can feel the pain. The late-term abortion ban is commonsense policy, supported by almost two-thirds of the American people. But virtually every Democrat voted in lockstep against protecting these innocent lives.
When I ran for office, I pledged to stand for life. And as President, that's exactly what I've done. And I have kept my promise, and I think everybody here understands that fully. One of my very first acts as President was to reinstate the Mexico City Policy, to prevent taxpayer dollars from funding abortion centers overseas. It's a little reminiscent of Ronald Reagan. A few months later, with Marjorie in the Oval Office—she was sitting there with us, and she stood then and signed legislation to overturn the rule that forced States to fund abortion providers with taxpayer dollars. Marjorie was there with me.

My administration has also taken bold action to protect religious liberty. And today we are making another historic announcement. For decades, American taxpayers have been wrongfully forced to subsidize the abortion industry through Title X Federal funding. So today we have kept another promise. My administration has proposed a new rule to prohibit Title X funding from going to any clinic that performs abortions. [Applause] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Thank you very much. We're also seeking passage of the 20-week abortion bill, which would end painful, late-term abortions nationwide. The House just passed the bill, but Democrats in the Senate are doing everything within their power to block it, although some are actually on our side. But they are working overtime to block it.

So the story is, '18 midterms—we need Republicans, and that will happen. On this issue, like so many other issues, the Democratic Party is far outside the American mainstream. Far outside. The United States is one of only seven countries in the world to allow elective abortions after 20 weeks, when unborn babies can truly feel the pain. Yet Democratic Senators like Jon Tester, Heidi Heitkamp, Claire McCaskill, Debbie Stabenow all voted against the 20-week bill and in favor of late-term abortion.

The President. Got to get out and vote. We are nine votes away from passing the 20-week abortion bill in the Senate, so we have to get them out there. The Democratic Senators are up for reelection in 10 States that I won by a lot. [Laughter] And I think we're doing very well. We have some of those folks that are running right now, and they're doing very, very well. Going to have a big, big surprise in 6 months. Big, beautiful surprise. [Laughter]

Heidi voted no on legislation to stop late term abortions. [booing]
Nobody thought that was going to happen. Tester voted against it. Jon Tester voted no on legislation to stop late term abortions. [applause]
As you all know, Roe vs. Wade has resulted in some of the most permissive abortion laws anywhere in the world. For example, in the United States, it's one of only seven countries to allow elective late-term abortions, along with China, North Korea, and others. Right now, in a number of States, the laws allow a baby to be born [torn; White House correction.] from his or her mother's womb in the ninth month. It is wrong; it has to change. Americans are more and more pro-life. You see that all the time. In fact, only 12 percent of Americans support abortion on demand at any time. Under my administration, we will always defend the very first right in the Declaration of Independence, and that is the right to life.

And during my first week in office, I reinstated a policy first put in place by President Ronald Reagan, the Mexico City policy. I strongly supported the House of Representative's Pain-Capable bill, which would end painful, late-term abortions nationwide. And I call upon the Senate to pass this important law and send it to my desk for signing. On the National Day of Prayer, I signed an Executive order to protect religious liberty. Very proud of that. Today I'm announcing that we have just issued a new proposal to protect conscience rights and religious freedoms of doctors, nurses, and other medical professionals. So important. I have also just reversed the previous administration's policy that restricted States' efforts to direct Medicaid funding away from abortion facilities that violate the law.

Heidi voted no on legislation to stop late term abortions. [booing]
We have--we have two people running for the United States Senate on the Democrat Party. They love late-term abortion and they believe in gun control. [booing]
The President. Well, I have a great relationship with Catholics. I've done so much for Catholics. You take look at the abortion issue. You take a look at many of these—you have Mexico City; you take a look at so many of the different issues. My relationship with Catholics and the Catholic Church has been very, very good, as you know very well.

Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
Nobody thought that was going to happen. Tester voted against it. Jon Tester voted no on legislation to stop late term abortions. [applause]
He co-sponsored legislation that provides late term abortion on demand. You know that. He backed a total government takeover of healthcare and he even sponsored legislation to provide free taxpayer funded healthcare to illegal aliens. Which I'm sure you love paying for that. [booing]
Democrats are also pushing extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Allowing children to be ripped from their mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. What's that all about? [booing]
Incredible. Millions of innocent beautiful babies are counting on us to protect them, and we will. [cheers and applause] That is why last week I go I called on Congress, with your great congressman over there—thank you, fellas—to immediately pass legislation prohibiting extreme late-term abortion. [cheers and applause] And that certainly is extreme. Many people never even heard of it. I mean, have you ever even hear of anything like this?
They're becoming the party of socialism, late-term abortion, open borders, and crime. [booing] This weekend, some Democrats even proposed a measure that would force the release of thousands of criminal illegal aliens—[booing]—including dangerous felons convicted of rape, sex trafficking, violent assault, and even murder, into our country. Can you believe this? [booing]
In recent months the Democrat party has also been aggressively pushing extreme late-term abortion, allowing children [booing] -- to be ripped from their mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. And now we go a step further in Virginia. The Governor stated that he would even allow a newborn baby--wrap the baby up, make the baby comfortable--to be executed [booing] after birth. That is why in my State of the Union Address I called on Congress to immediately pass legislation prohibiting the extreme late-term abortion of babies. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat Party has never been further outside of the mainstream. They are being brought so far left you wouldn't like it folks. You wouldn't like it. You won't be happy. Radical Democrats are the party of high taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, crime, hoaxes, and delusions.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
KARL: Has -- has -- do you think Biden has sufficiently answered the question on the Hyde amendment, which -- which bans federal funds for abortion? He had supported it year after year after year, now he says he's against it. Does that close the case for that?
The Hyde amendment isn't about abortion per se. The Hyde amendment is -- is truly about equality of health care and health care access for low-income women and women of color and women that get caught in our -- in our mass incarceration system. And so the Hyde amendment is -- is about income inequality and it's about women's healthcare in a system of income inequality. So I think that we need to repeal it. I think that -- that having that -- a strong record, I think all of this is stuff for voters to decide. But I think that we really -- this is not in the niche topic of women's issues anymore, this is an American issue.
And President Trump kept his word, when he's appointed more principled conservatives to our federal courts in the last two years than any President in American history. [Cheering.] And they are all men and women who will uphold all of the God-given liberties enshrined in our Constitution, like the freedom of religion, the freedom of speech, and the second amendment right to keep and bear arms. [Cheering.] And while leading voices in the Democratic Party advocate late term abortion and eveb defend infanticide. . .  [Booing.]. . .I couldn't be more proud to serve alongside a President who stands without apology for the sanctity of human life. [Cheering.]
THE PRESIDENT: Republicans do not believe in socialism, we believe in freedom, and so do you. [Applause.]  We will defend Medicare and Social Security for our great seniors. We will defend it like nobody else. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions, always. Always. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports taxpayer-funded abortion right up to the moment of birth, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. Leading Democrats have even opposed measures to prevent the execution of children after birth. You saw that. . . in Virginia. [Booing.]
Republicans believe that every life is a sacred gift from God. [Applause.] That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion.
TIME: Going back to kind of a health care question. Do you support the Alabama abortion law that was recently passed?
Unfortunately, Democrat politicians have become increasingly hostile to pro-life Americans who want to help more children find a loving home and share their dreams with the world. Virtually every top Democrat lawmaker now supports taxpayer-funded abortion, right up to the moment of birth.

So that becomes an execution. That becomes an execution. Every child born and unborn is made in the holy image of God, and that is why I have asked Congress to prohibit the late-term abortion of babies. And they'll do that. [Applause] Thank you.

The President. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. During my first week in office, I reinstated the Mexico City policy. People thought that wasn't going to be happening. We've issued a final rule to prohibit Title X taxpayer funding from subsidizing the abortion industry. And just last month, our administration ended Federal funding of fetal tissue research. All of us working to foster a culture that celebrates the sacred worth of every human life.

The choice of our future has never been clearer. The radical left offers a vision of socialism, censorship, high taxes, open borders and extreme late-term abortion. Our movement is about lifting up all Americans. We're fighting for the American worker, we're fighting for the American family, and we're fighting for the American Dream.

Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion. [booing] And then you’ll have like a governor of Virginia, it’s not only late term abortion, it’s killing the baby after the baby is born. How about that? [booing] Think of that. Think of that. That’s why I’ve asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, and they’re the party, frankly, of socialism. [booing]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother’s womb. [booing] Right up, up till . . .  Right up until the moment of birth. And in the case of the Virginia Governor, he’s having a rough, rough time. In his case, the baby is born, and then he goes to talk to the mother. The doctor talks to the mother. The baby is now born, wrapped, as he said, and then they decide whether or not to execute the baby. [booing]  Who would believe that.
That is why I’ve asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause]  Hard to believe, isn’t it?
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion and socialism. [booing]
The other Dan, he supports Nancy Pelosi's agenda—[booing]—of higher taxes, fewer jobs, open borders, and even sanctuary counties. And you know Dan McCready even opposed a bill to protect the lives of babies who survive abortion. [booing]
We'll always protect patients with preexisting conditions also. Always, yep, my word. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 51 years. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion. [booing]
Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth, and if you look at Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, he was even talking about essentially you would say an execution. He was talking after the baby is born, the doctor will talk to the mother and they'll make the decision as to whether or not that baby lives. This is a radical Democrat idea. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. They're socialists. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. Every day they're making good on the motto, "promises made, promises kept." In fact, we are keeping even more promises by far than we made, or than we promised. So many more. So many more. So many more.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mothers right up until the moment of birth, and that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] It's true. Right? I see it. Just like mom, I see it.
The President. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it is the party of the American dream. [cheers and applause] We've achieved record funding for the US military. All of that money, trillions and trillions of dollars spent, all produced right here in the good old USA. [cheers and applause] And I have to tell you, New Mexico, I know you're gonna like this. A lot of those trillions because you know when you do the 716 and the 730 and the 700 billion, all of a sudden you're in trillions and I can save a lot of lines when I just say trillions. A lot of that money's going to be spent in the state-of-the-art military equipment that's being used at Holloman Air Force Base, White Sands Missile Range—[cheers and applause]—Kirkland Air Force Base, and many other vital New Mexico military installations that are going up as we speak.
And that's more can you can say for those do-nothing Democrats in Washington D.C. I mean, the truth is the Democratic Party has been taken over by radical leftists who want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialist policies that would crush our economy. And worst of all, today's Democrats have spent the last three years trying to overturn the will of the American people in the last election. And they're back at it again. But despite three years of non-stop resistance and investigations and obstruction by the Democrats and the media, I'm here to tell you President Donald Trump has never stopped fighting to keep the promises that he made to the people of Minnesota, and he never will. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant Washington corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it's the party of the American Dream. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports, late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up to the moment of birth. That's why, I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party–the American worker, the American family and the American dream, that's what they want. Republicans want the American dream. [applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that crackpot governor from Virginia executes the baby after birth. You saw that, right? After birth. You remember that one from last year. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of crazy politicians, high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. They're corrupt, like Schiff is corrupt. He's corrupt. [shouting]
The President. ... more advantages than our own citizens have, more advantages than our own military has. [booing] Jim Hood wants to raise your taxes. He supports taxpayer funding for abortion providers. [booing] He supports illegal immigration, all benefits, and he opposed our travel ban, which is so important that we won in the United States Supreme Court to keep terrorists the hell out of our country. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. Well, the governor of Virginia executed a baby. Remember that whole thing? After birth, after birth. Some people never heard of it. He said the baby is born and then he starts talking to the mother. Nobody ever heard that. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream. Nobody has done more for the African-American community than the Republican party. [cheers and applause] And we're also the party of Abraham Lincoln. We can't forget that. People forget. Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
I got you choice too. If you don't like your job, you find another one. You tell the boss, "Hey, I'm getting out of here, I don't like this guy." You go get a better job for more money. Beshear doesn't represent you. He represents the Washington swamp and he's backed by the same people trying to overthrow the last election. [shouting] Beshear supported Crooked Hillary Clinton, and he's funded by the pro-abortion lobby and open borders fanatics. Open borders, let everyone pour right in. Let them all pour right in. Beshear wants to bring sanctuary cities to Kentucky, think of that one. [cheers and applause] Releasing violent criminals and aliens to terrorize innocent Kentucky families. He wants sanctuary cities. He hasn't learned what's happened.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from their mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [booing] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and it's the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. We forgot that. Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] The incredible rebuilding of our military includes over 100 billion-dollar investments all across the state of Kentucky.
Edwards is backed by his fellow open border extremists and pro-abortion lobby. Edwards is a complete disaster for the state of Louisiana, and you cannot afford four more years of this far-left travesty. It is time to replace your failed Governor John Bel Edwards with Eddie Rispone, who is going to do an incredible job. [applause]
It was a lie. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in over 50 years. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment —[booing]— right up to the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. It's also the party of the late great Abraham Lincoln, people forget. We have confirmed already 158 incredible judges to interpret the Constitution as written, including two great Supreme Court Justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. [applause]
I don't think Schiff plays very well down here. He's controlled by the same extremists who are pushing the impeachment witch hunt. And John Bel Edwards, if he gets ever involved in that, he's going to push it like hell. And I'sh—honestly-- I didn't, I didn't have to be down 'ere--all I do is make enemies 'cause if he wins, I got another enemy. What the hell difference does it make? I have so many. But then I have an enemy in Louisiana. I don't want that, and you need a Republican here. Everyone's Republican. You need a Republican, not a Democrat. [cheers and applause] It's one of the reasons he gets nothing done. He's a chosen candidate. Think of this, John Bel. He wants open borders. [booing] He wants radical pro-abortion policies, and he loves the fake news media. I hear they treat him great. They love 'im. You know why they love 'im? Because he does what they want, and what they want is exactly the opposite of what you want. We know that.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. They're corrupt. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
Can you imagine this? That's because our system is all screwed up. So, I say go to Canada, buy 'em and it'll change watch what happens, watch what happens with the drugs, but I'm giving Florida and I'm giving some other states we're giving Florida, though the right to go and buy at a much lower price—[applause]—virtually every top Democrat also supports late term abortion ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing]
That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God [cheers and applause]. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream and remember this the Republican Party is the party of Abraham Lincoln. We forget. Abraham Lincoln, and I've always heard that the most important thing a President can do is the appointment of judges. I say maybe the military, because without the military we're not so interested in judges, right. So, I think maybe the military, but we've done a great job with that totally rebuild.
Republicans will defend your sacred right to choose the doctor, and you can choose your plan, and you choose the plan that's right for you. We will strongly protect patients with preexisting conditions. We will also protect your right to get the physician that you want. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. And this character in Virginia. Did you see the Virginia governor? [booing] I mean, he gave a whole expose. The baby is born, and then basically, they start talking to the mother. The baby is born. And there's no other word. If the mother decides no, then they execute the baby. Okay? He's the governor of Virginia and why the Republicans aren't going to win Virginia this next election, 2020. I'll tell you what, we're going to give it a very strong shot. When you have people like that, we're going to give it a very strong shot. But that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion. Because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the party of honest Abe Lincoln. [applause] Party of Abe Lincoln.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb—[booing]—right up until the moment of birth. Right? That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. And that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. And that's really what it is. We're also the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. A lot of people forget that, but we have to bring it up. To protect the health and safety of our citizens, we awarded $100 million to improve water infrastructure in Flint. How badly was Flint? Who was, who were the geniuses that did that to you? You have clean water coming into Flint. They had to pay a very tiny little fee. So, instead, they go into this horrible, horrible, really polluted water and the water comes out of there. They spend hundreds of millions of dollars to save like a couple of bucks, and the water was so terrible, and it hurt the people. It hurt the people. But we're getting it fixed. And I know your previous governor was a Republican, but I was not a big fan of his. I was not, but I'm not a big fan of the one that can't fix the potholes either.
The Vice President. And four more years means more jobs. Four more years means more judges. Four more years means more support for our troops. [cheers and applause] And it's gonna take at least four more years to drain that swamp. [cheers and applause] You know, the choice in this election couldn't be clearer. The stakes couldn't be higher. Today we have a president who loves this country, who stands by our military, our workers, and our freedom. He never quits, he never backs down. He believes in you and fights for you every single day. [cheers and applause] And the contrast is, today's Democratic party's been taken over by radical leftists—[booing]—who want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialist policies that would crush this economy. And worst of all, after a sham investigation, those do-nothing Democrats in Congress actually voted to impeach our president. [booing] They rushed their partisan impeachment through the House, remember, they said it was urgent. And now Nancy Pelosi's been sitting on those articles of impeachment for almost a month. [shouting] It's a disgrace.
Republicans will defend middle class taxpayers and the right to keep the doctor of your choice. We will protect patients with pre-existing conditions. And we will protect your pre-existing physician. [cheers and applause] You'll have your physician. Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Radical Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the party of the American dream. We still have that American dream. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late term abortion, [booing] ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
But they're the party of late term abortion, socialism and corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American Dream, and of course, honest Abe Lincoln, right? Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. We are a movement. There's a movement like nobody's ever seen before. You know, when I mention this, anything I say that's even slightly false, [gestures toward media] it's headlines. "Trump said this." These people! He said this. This is one of the greatest—I would say this. This is the greatest movement in the history of our country, I really believe that. Never been a movement like this. [cheers and applause] Right?
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion. [booing] Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. And that is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. Look at what's happening to their cities. Los Angeles, it's so sad. What you see is so sad with the homeless and the way they don't take care of the homeless. San Francisco, you could take a ... Starting in New York. You could take a look at what's happening to our cities run by Democrats. It's a disaster. They don't know what the hell they're doing. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
I mean, I don't have to tell you here in Iowa, you see it every day. Today's Democrat party has been taken over by radical leftists. They want higher taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, and openly advocate socialist policies that would crush this economy. [shouting] And worst of all, after three years of endless investigations, the Democrats in Congress actually voted to impeach our president. [booing] They sent those articles of impeachment to the Senate, where they are being considered even as we speak. [shouting] You know, what the Democrats in Washington are doing in the Senate is a disgrace. [shouting] They rushed their partisan impeachment through the House in a shameful attempt to overturn the will of the American people.
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up until the moment of birth. That is why I have asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. No matter how you cut it, that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. You know that, right? Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? Abraham Lincoln. [applause]
We've launched bold new initiatives combating kidney disease and Alzheimer's disease. We're making tremendous progress, and we're pursuing new advances in neonatal research. Think of that, neonatal research, the numbers are incredible. What's happened is incredible, to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in doing so. All of the radical Democrats in the presidential debates have declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. [booing] That is why in my State of the Union, I asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total destruction of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, the Second Amendment, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? [cheers and applause] Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background, every community, and every walk of life. We are the party of boundless optimism, excitement, energy, and enthusiasm. We have tremendous energy. Tremendous energy. [cheers and applause]
All of the radical Democrats in the presidential debates have declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the very moment of birth. You know that. That is why at my State of the Union, I asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion for babies—[cheers and applause]—because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. That's what it is. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] People forget that. People forget Honest Abe. He's the most presidential guy, right? I've always said I could be more presidential than anybody, but I'm not sure I can beat Honest Abe when he wears the hat. That hat is too much. It's so easy to be presidential, so easy. It's so much easier than doing what I have to do, but you know what I'd have? I'd have about three people in the front row. [laughter]
We're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in so doing. Virtually every Democrat candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause] The Democrat Party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and of course the late, great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
We are combating the opioid epidemic. Drug overdose deaths have declined for the first time in nearly 31 years. [cheers and applause] Big problem. And we've launched new initiatives combating kidney disease and Alzheimer's, and we're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients, and breaking all records in so doing. [cheers and applause] Virtually every Democratic candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up until the very moment of birth. How about that? That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause]
The Democratic party is the party of high taxes, high crime, unlimited regulations, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
And look what happened to Biden in Ukraine where his son's paid 83,000 a month and he was jobless. Give me a break. Eighty-three thousand a month. More than anybody. If Joe Biden were to become president an emboldened left will launch a full-scale assault on American life. You know that. They'll expel anyone who disagrees with them. Look what happens when you disagree. You use a term that's perfect and they're not happy with it. They call you a racist. They call you a horrible person. [shouting] They wanna crush religious liberty, they don't want religion, silence religious believers, indoctrinate your children with hateful and vicious lies about our country, subsidize late-term abortion and after-birth execution. [booing]
Give free healthcare to illegal aliens. You don't get free healthcare? Expand deadly sanctuary cities. Force taxpayers to subsidize late-term abortion. Shut down the energy fields of Pennsylvania. They want to shut them down. No fossil fuel. No fossil fuel. Texas isn't too happy, either. Go to Texas. I just left Texas a little while ago, two weeks. I said, they don't want energy, they don't want guns, and they don't want religion. A guy stands up, says, "Not going to win Texas!" But you have the same thing, because you do a big, you're a big fracking state. You want to see your taxes go up? Stop fracking. Doesn't hurt you at all, fracking. They want to throw up windmills that are going to ruin your houses. I mean, put up a big windmill. You walk out your door. You'll see those big monsters churning. But even that they don't want to do. I don't think they want to do anything. I think they want to close your businesses. But just remember, Second Amendment. They're going to take it away. As sure as you're sitting or standing. They're going to take it away from you. The Second Amendment. Don't let it happen.
Great people. Great, great people. Joe Biden claims he has empathy for the vulnerable. Yet the party he leads supports the extreme late-term abortion of defenseless babies right up until the moment of birth.
Joe Biden would be- [cheers and applause] So Joe Biden would be a disaster for all communities, not just the Hispanic community. He's pledged to wage attacks on Catholic organizations, like the Little Sisters of the Poor that we're helping. And we're winning with them. We're helping them. They got hit so hard by O'Biden. They got hit so hard. [laughter] I remember them in the Supreme Court, the Little Sisters of the Poor. They get hit by Biden. And then he says, "How wonderful." He's such a wonderful person. He supports taxpayer-funded extreme late-term abortion. And I mean ninth month, ninth month, ninth month.
The Democrats and Biden would be a disaster for Hispanic Americans. He's pledged to wage attacks on Catholic organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor. They're fighting him. He supports taxpayer-funded extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Extreme late-term. He would allow left-wing anarchists to burn down your businesses. He would hand over your jobs to China, and your country to the socialists and beyond the socialists. [booing] The Democrat party also continues to attack our incredible border agents, more than half of whom happen to be Hispanic Americans, okay? And they're great. And I wanna thank not only law enforcement, but a big part of law enforcement, the Border Patrol and the ICE agents, they're incredible. [cheers and applause]
Under Biden, Democrats will wipe out every single victory the pro-life movement has achieved, and we've achieved plenty, and allow, and fully allow infants to be ripped out of their mother's wombs. We talked about it in the last debate or one of the debates with Crooked Hillary Clinton and, uh, late-term, we talked late-term, but this is far beyond late-term abortion. This is a terrible thing.
So you have a governor between that and between, uh, the Second Amendment. Uh, they are coming after you, and I think we should win Virginia. If I can't, we can't win Virginia, I don't know, I would be very surprised. A lot of people agree with me, by the way. When I'm re-elected, I will work with the Republican Congress to ban extreme late-term abortion because every child is a sacred gift of God. And that's the way it is.
So I wanna just thank you all. It's so important. Some people would say, "Well, save your time. Don't go to Virginia. Democrats have sort of taken—the radical left has, a little bit, taken over Virginia." I don't believe it. You have an incompetent governor. You have a governor that's gonna take away your guns and what he's done to, to—against pro-life, what he's done in terms of abortion, what he's done in terms of execution after birth, babies' execution after birth, I just hope you can see to it, vote for Donald Trump.
But they wanna ban all prayer in public schools and require taxpayers to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing] Biden's justices will erase national borders, they don't want borders, protect sanctuary cities, and compel the unlimited entry of foreign nationals. And if you look at some of these jihadist nations, no thank you. Somebody said, "That's not nice. That's not politically correct." I said, "That's okay." They'll cripple the police departments, free violent criminals, shield foreign terrorists, and declare the death penalty unconstitutional, even for the most depraved mass murderers who kill women and children. That's what they want. They don't want any death penalty. Not for the Boston Bomber, not for anybody. You see the Boston Bomber, they're still trying this guy, what he did to so many lives. He ruined, killed people, ruined so many families, ruined so many lives. In three— And by the way, they want the Boston Bomber to be able to vote. You know that. [booing]
Every time you complain, remember it was Harry Reid, your person in charge. He had your job before. It was Harry Reid who made this all possible. Thank you very much, Harry. I hope you're enjoying your evening. [cheears and applause] No, they blame us. Harry Reid gave us the power, nuclear option. Thank you Harry, very much. But he wants to pack the court, Supreme Court, with radicals who will terminate the Second Amendment, confiscate your firearms, eliminate the right to self defense, strike "under God" from the pledge of allegiance and all other places—[booing]—tear down crosses from public spaces, and force taxpayers to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing]
The President. I don't forget things. Thank you. [cheers and applause] I don't forget things. Where are the pastors that got up? Where are they? Where are they? Where are those guys? Man, oh man. [cheers and applause] I'll never follow you again. At least we had Herschel in between, right? [laughter] And Herschel didn't like it either. That was really great. Thank you both. Thank you all very much. That was beautiful. That was from the heart and we appreciate it. We won't forget. We won't forget. I will fiercely defend the vital role of Black churches in America. [cheers and applause] Joe Biden and the Democrats say that Black lives matter but they do not protect the most vulnerable Black lives of all: unborn children. [cheers and applause] They support the unlimited abortion of Black children right up until the ninth month of pregnancy. And if you look at this governor of Virginia, beyond, I had not heard that. But if you look at the governor of Virginia, he said, "The baby is born, and then they start to talk."
I said, "Wait a minute, that's not abortion. That's, that's not abortion." You know what that is? No, it's, it's, I call it, I call it execution.
The President. You've seen that, right? I had not heard that. You hear "late-term abortion." You never heard that. But the governor of Virginia, the one that thinks he's Michael Jackson—[laughter]—the one whose wife stopped him, whose wife from trying to imitate Michael Jackson moonwalking. Now one thing we know, he's not gonna be Michael. There's no, there's nobody, there's nobody that can moonwalk like Michael. See. He got very lucky. That would have been the end if he would've done that. But the Democrats champion Planned Parenthood, an organization founded on racism that continues to target the Black community. In the Republican party, we believe in protecting all Black lives, including the unborn. We believe that every child, of every race, born and unborn, is made in the holy image of God. [cheers and applause] Republicans believe that all human life is sacred.
But they want to destroy the sanctity of the Supreme Court, the importance of the Supreme Court, the majesty of the Supreme Court. They'll terminate religious liberty, cancel free speech, and force you to fund extreme late-term abortion. [booing] And there will be nothing to stop them. If they don't get in, there's going to be nothing to stop them. You have no idea how bad it will be. There will be nothing. I used to argue with certain people about the filibuster. I said, look, I don't like it either, but I do it because I know they are going to do it. And everybody said, "Oh, they'll never do it." They're doing it. They've already announced they're going to do it. That means they can do anything they want. And, you know, the Republicans, they play a different game. I don't know, maybe they love the country more. But they said, "No, no, they'll never do it." And I said, "Well Schumer, he'll do it the first day he gets in, he'll do it." And that's exactly what's happening, and he'll do it. And he will do that to the Supreme Court, there's no question. But they look forward to it because you know why? We put on three—think of this, three great justices and—[applause]—and—we'll be over 300 federal judges in the United States, which will be a record. Three hundred, three hundred. And they don't want to wait, they want to do it very quickly. "Let's just vote and we'll take it." This takes years and years and years to slowly change a court and perhaps I got a little bit lucky to get three. A lot of presidents have had none. They've never had—they stay on for a long time, they're young when they go on and they're old when they come off. But the fact is a lot of presidents, good presidents, great presidents—they say you can't be a great president unless you've put in Supreme Court Justices. They say it's the single most important thing a president can do. And I'm not sure that's right, I think military defense, military offense, frankly, is the most important thing. [applause] But it's certainly one of the most important things you can do. And the fact that I have more than—I will have by the end, more than 300—first term, think of it. And if we do a second term, which I hope we do, we could have close to 540. [applause] But the fact that I had three Supreme Court Justices in the first term is not making them feel too good.
Marjorie Taylor Greene. Hello, Northwest Georgia. All right. Let me tell you something. I'm so fired up to hear Senator Kelly Loeffler. She's going to object on January 6th. [cheers and applause] Yeah! This is, this is why I believe in her. You see, when you have a strong Senator Kelly Loeffler from Georgia fighting for you, and fighting for your President, and protecting your vote, this is why you have to turn out tomorrow, right? [cheers and applause] Yes. We have to save our Senate sets—Senate seats. We have to save America and stop socialism. This is the last line. We aren't gonna hand over our Senate seats to a pastor who preaches abortion from the pulpit. [booing] No. He's, he's preaching murder of God's creation in the womb, holding a Bible in his hand.
We've reinstated the Mexico City Policy, a longstanding policy. [Applause] Isn't that nice? And by the way, on Friday, a lot of people are going to be showing up to Washington, right, Mike? A lot of people. You know, the press never gives them the credit that they deserve. They'll have 300, 400, 500, 600,000 people; you won't even read about it. When other people show up you, read big time about it, right? So it's not fair, but nothing fair about the media. [Laughter] Nothing. A longstanding policy to ensure taxpayer dollars do not fund abortion services overseas.

Nearly every Democrat voted against a ban on late-term abortion, when unborn babies can feel the pain. The late-term abortion ban is commonsense policy, supported by almost two-thirds of the American people. But virtually every Democrat voted in lockstep against protecting these innocent lives.
Heidi voted no on legislation to stop late term abortions. [booing]
Sadly, on immigration and so many other issues, Democrat lawmakers have totally abandoned the American mainstream. But that's going to be good for us in 2020. They're embracing open borders, socialism, and extreme late-term abortion.
Just this week, Senate Democrats opposed legislation to prevent the killing of newborn infant children who survive abortions. Virtually every Democrat voted against protecting these precious babies. Every one. They vote in groups.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
