They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Defending the rule of law is a priority, not just in the courts, but also on the streets and on the border. We've told the incredible police of our Nation that they have our full support as they work to bring down violent crime rates. We've taken bold action to go after criminal cartels and made it a top priority to prosecute anyone who targets law enforcement. This has been the work of my administration: fighting for the American worker, defending the rule of law, and returning the power to the American people. Since my Inauguration, economic confidence has soared, reaching higher than any time in 9 years. Optimism among manufacturers is at a record high. And small-business confidence has seen its largest increase in nearly four decades.

And you've heard this but I'm going to say it over and over because I'm really proud of it: Remember I said, "What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose?" African-Americans and so many others, I said, "What do you have to lose? You have high crime rates. You have horrible education. You have this"--I went through a list of 10, that's what happened. And I looked and I said, "You've been totally giving your votes to Democrats. They've let you down." I said, "What the hell do you have to lose?" [applause]
What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose? Remember? Ha. Remember, I said, what do you have to lose? People said, oh, that's not nice. I said, hey, I go through a chart, it talked about the highest crime rates, the worst education, the worst homeownership. I'd go through--and I just looked up one night and I said, you've always been with the Democrats. Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose? Remember that, right? Right?[applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
