Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
These days, there's no such thing as a Blue Dog Democrat, a red State Democrat, or a conservative Democrat because they are all Pelosi Democrats: weak on crime, weak on terrorism, and weak on national defense.
Democrats like to campaign as moderates, but they always govern like radicals. That is why I am going to campaign all across this country to elect Republicans so that we can reduce taxes further, reduce crime, increase jobs, and make our communities safe and prosperous and secure. And I'll be all over the country. Kevin, you'll get me all over. Where is our Kevin? You're going to get me all over the country, Kevin. [Laughter] And I'll be complaining every single trip. [Laughter] But I'm going to get there.
And as part of our unprecedented effort, our great Vice President, a true leader in the pro-life movement—Mike has been a true leader—has been working to elect more and more Republicans. We will be appealing to voters all across America who previously sent a Democrat to Washington, only to discover they elected a proxy vote for Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi. [Laughter] These are people that don't believe in borders, don't believe in fighting crime, don't believe in making a strong military. They don't believe in what the people in this room believe—that I can tell you. So we have to do a great job.

You don't want your 401(k)s being cut in half, and if you vote Democrat, that's what's going to happen. They want to erase our gains and plunge our country into a nightmare of gridlock, poverty, chaos and, frankly, crime, because that's what comes with it. [booing]
And I've said it and I'll say it as many times as you want to hear it, and it's because of their policy: The Democrats are truly the party of crime, because that's what happens. Open borders, that's what happens. [booing]
How about this? The Dems want to raise your taxes. We want to lower your taxes. We don't want crime. Crime's OK for them. They want open borders. How the hell do we not win this thing in a landslide every time? How do you . . . [applause]
They're for crime and high taxes. We're for low taxes and no crime. I don't know. Somehow I don't think I would have been a very good politician on the other side of this equation.
She wants to keep crime out of Minnesota. That sounds like a good platform, right? Tina Smith would rather protect violent criminal aliens than loyal American citizens, which is why Tina Smith, that nobody ever heard of, needs to be voted out of office. She got appointed, I guess.
Unless they come through legally. If you want more jobs and less crime, than you have to vote Republican. We are honored to be joined today by several, incredible Mississippi Republican leaders and . . . and this one is really a friend of mine for a long time. He just finished the African-American Museum and we went through it a few months ago when it was opening. And he was so proud of it and just the people, everybody loves this guy. He's a special guy, special man, Governor Phil Bryant. So . . . [applause]
Democrats have become the party of caravans and crime. True. Because when you have open borders, you have crime. When you have sanctuary cities, you have crime. Republicans are committed to halting this incursion and defending the sovereign territory of the United States of America. We're very proud of it. [applause]
So if you want more jobs, less crime, strong borders—how are we doing on the borders? [applause]
We're getting them out. In the state of Texas alone, according to the Texas Department of Public Safety, between 2011 and 2018, more than 663,000 crimes were committed by illegal immigrants. You know, you hear these stories about, oh, they don't commit crimes. We commit crimes, they don't commit crimes. Always it's us. No, no, it doesn't work that way. It's fake news. It's fake news. [booing]
Meanwhile, working-class Americans are left to pay the price for mass illegal immigration: reduced jobs, lower wages, overburdened schools, hospitals that are so crowded you can't get in, increased crime, and a depleted social safety net. Tolerance for illegal immigration is not compassionate; it is actually very cruel.
In the last 2 years, our brave ICE officers made 266,000 arrests of criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of nearly 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 killings or murders. We are joined tonight by one of those law enforcement heroes: ICE Special Agent Elvin Hernandez. When Elvin—[applause]—thank you. When Elvin was a boy, he and his family legally immigrated to the United States from the Dominican Republic. At the age of 8, Elvin told his dad he wanted to become a Special Agent. Today, he leads investigations into the scourge of international sex trafficking.
The border city of El Paso, Texas, used to have extremely high rates of violent crime, one of the highest in the entire country, and considered one of our Nation's most dangerous cities. Now, immediately upon its building, with a powerful barrier in place, El Paso is one of the safest cities in our country. Simply put: Walls work, and walls save lives. So let's work together, compromise, and reach a deal that will truly make America safe.
They're becoming the party of socialism, late-term abortion, open borders, and crime. [booing] This weekend, some Democrats even proposed a measure that would force the release of thousands of criminal illegal aliens—[booing]—including dangerous felons convicted of rape, sex trafficking, violent assault, and even murder, into our country. Can you believe this? [booing]
Their proposal would put a hard cap on the number of illegal aliens that are brave ICE officers, we love our ICE officers—[cheers and applause]—can detain and thus remove, forcing thousands of criminals to be set free into United States communities. I don't think so. Okay. I don't think so. And I want to thank our ICE offices. What they put up is incredible—[applause]—and that includes Border Patrol and that includes law enforcement. Let's face it. Law enforcement, we love them. They keep us safe. In the last two years alone, ICE officers have made 200—listen to these numbers—266,000 arrests of criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of approximately 100,000 assaults, 40,000, 40, 40,000 larcenies, 30,000 sex crimes, 25,000 burglaries, 12,000 vehicle thefts, 11,000 robberies, 4,000 kidnappings, and 4,000 murders—[booing]—murders, murders, killings, murders.
And there's no place better to talk about border security, whether they like it or not, because I've been hearing a lot of things," Oh, the wall didn't make that much of a difference." You know where it made a big difference? Right here in El Paso. [cheers and applause] And I've been watching where they've been trying to say, "Oh, the wall didn't make that much—" Well you take a look at what they did with their past crimes, and how they made them from very serious to much lesser. You take a look at what the real system is. I spoke to people that have been here a long time. They said, "When that wall went up, it's a whole different ball game." Is that a correct statement? [cheers and applause] Whole different ball game.
Including those charged or convicted of approximately 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, 25,000 burglaries, 4,000 kidnappings, and 4,000 violent murders. These are people that ICE is going in and getting and either putting in jail or ideally bringing them back to other countries and letting them put in jail, because we don't want them. We don't want to have to pay for them for 50 years. You want them to pay a price, but we don't want to have to pay for them for 50 years.
Just ask the "angel" moms, how good are they? Those great "angel" moms who were treated so badly—so badly. Incredible people. But the simple reality is that every crime committed by an illegal immigrant is a crime that should never have happened in the first place.
As we protect our jobs, we are also protecting America's borders. And we are taking on the extremist and they're really radical, radical extremist Democrats who want open borders and crime, because that's what happens. Open borders and crime. [booing] Last month alone more than 76,000 illegal immigrants arrived at our borders to be apprehended. We have to apprehend them. Do you know what a great job -- I mean seriously think of that, 76,000 people, many of which are rough people. Okay, I'm being nice because they [points to media] will criticize me if I'm not. They will say, "How dare he say that!" But we have people that have criminal records. We have a lot of people. We have a lot of problems. We apprehend them. We capture them. Do you know how tough that job is, border patrol? You know how tough? I don't think any of you guys here -- yeah, you would. That guy would like it. There are some people would like it. They love it. They're great American patriots and ICE, these are great American patriots. [cheers and applause]
So, now we are defending our borders for our country and the people of our country. [cheers and applause] In the last two years alone ICE officers--we love ICE--have made, listen to this though, 266,000 arrests of criminal aliens. Who the hell wants to do that? You don't wanna do it, right? You like what you are doing--making cars, right? I like making cars, I think better, too. But they like it. That's what they do. They're great at it. Including those charged or convicted of nearly 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, 4000 kidnappings and 4000 murders.
The Democrat Party has never been further outside of the mainstream. They are being brought so far left you wouldn't like it folks. You wouldn't like it. You won't be happy. Radical Democrats are the party of high taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, crime, hoaxes, and delusions.
You know, I didn't hear that term until that third-rate actor in Chicago went out [booing] and he said, "I was beaten up by MAGA country." Can you believe it? Now that's a hate crime, right? He said he was beaten up by MAGA country, turned out to be a total lie. But think of it, MAGA, Make America Great Again. And by the way, I have to tell you, that case in Chicago is a disgrace to our nation. [cheers and applause] Disgrace.
But we need Democrats to vote on it, otherwise we can't change it. And they don't want, because No. 1, they don't want to give us a victory. We're going to take it anyway. We're going to take the victory, anyway. But they don't want to give us a victory on that issue. And No. 2, they don't mind open borders and obviously open borders bring tremendous crime, they don't mind crime, if you can believe.
So, Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, hoaxes, and delusions.
But Democrats say they care about the poor, but their open border policies drive down wages, drain Social Services, and hurt the poorest Americans more than anybody else. And the crime that comes in is unbelievable. You don't read it. They don't want to talk about it. Sanctuary City is a total disaster.
We need the votes. We have to go through Congress. How we ever ended with this stuff is incredible, but they don't mind it so much because they don't mind crime. They don't mind crime. No nation can tolerate a massive, organized violation of its immigration laws, and no one should run for office without an iron clad pledge to protect and defend America's borders. Shouldn't be allowed to run. [applause]. And to confront this crisis, as you saw that it was a big deal two months ago. I declared a national emergency, which is what it is. This is an invasion. When you see these caravans, starting out with 20,000 people, that's an invasion. I was badly criticized for using the word invasion, it's an invasion and it's also an invasion of drugs coming in from Mexico, OK. It's an invasion of drugs.
This is an ancient thing. It's an ancient crime. It's bigger now because of the computer because of the Internet than ever before worldwide, not just here, worldwide and most come through our southern border where we don't have a wall, they don't go through ports of entry. You have people looking inside the car or the van.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, witch hunts, and delusions. The Republican Party is the party for all Americans. We want to make America great again. That's what we're doing. [cheers and applause]
Wages are going way up, crime is going way down, and our military is more powerful right now than ever before. [cheers and applause] And when we took over two and a half years ago, our military was in big trouble. It was depleted, you know that. It was depleted, the equipment was old, the planes were old. Ah we have the most beautiful fighter jets in the world being delivered now, every day. Every day.
Fred Keller is a tough man, he's tough on crime. He loves our military, loves our police, he loves our vets and he will always protect patients, and he will always go for, like me, and I say it so strongly because the fake news doesn't want to say it. We will always protect pre-existing conditions, very important.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
So I don't think so, because there was no crime. You know, it's "high crimes and"—not "with" or "or." It's "high crimes and misdemeanors." There was no high crime, and there was no misdemeanor. So how do you impeach based on that?

The President. There were no charges. None. If you look at Bill Clinton, that very nice gentleman who's been so much on my side, as you know, his special prosecutor, it was guilty, guilty, guilty, guilty, guilty. So many guiltys. With me, there was no guilty. Number one, there was no crime. And number two, I fought back. And I'll tell you——

The President. Because he said it—he said it differently the first time. So he said, essentially, "You're innocent." I'm innocent of all charges. And, you know, the thing that nobody brings up: There was no crime. They're saying, "He's obstructing something," and there was no crime. And nobody brings it up.

Also, someday, you ought to read a thing called Article II. Read Article II, which gives the President powers that you wouldn't believe. But I don't even have to rely on Article II. There was no crime. There was no obstruction. There was no collusion. There was no nothing. And this is from a group of people that hate me. If they only found anything, they would've had it. And he knows that better than anybody.

The President. There was no crime, there was no charge, because he had no information.

The President. Well, we're going to have a statement about it. And I'm also going to have, probably today, a major statement on the border. This is a big league statement. But we are going to do something very dramatic on the border, because people are coming into our country—the Democrats will not give us laws. They will not change laws. They will not meet. They will not do anything. They want to have open borders. They want to have crime. They want to have drugs pouring into our country. They want to have human trafficking. I'm going to be making a statement probably tomorrow, but maybe today.

Prominent Republicans have stepped forward to disagree with the president on this and Senate Democrats tried to pass a bill that would make it a crime to fail to report interference in an election.
And, this President kept the promise made by four of his predecessors when he moved our embassy to Jerusalem, the capital of the state of Israel. [Cheering.] He promised our veterans, the real-time world-class health care that you earned in the uniform of the United States, and President Donald Trump delivered. We reformed the VA and Veteran's Choice is now the law. And this President has given the men and women of law enforcement the resources and the respect that they deserve every day. [Cheering.] Violent crime is down, and under the President's leadership we're waging an unprecedented fight against opioid abuse and addiction, all across America. And, of course, under President Trump's leadership we made historic investments to secure our southern border. [Cheering.]
And to remedy past injustices, we passed groundbreaking criminal justice reform. [Applause.] We ended the Clinton-era crime policies that unfairly affected the African-American community, so unfair. [Applause.] 
We've created nearly 9,000 Opportunity Zones with Tim Scott, from South Carolina, who's been a great guy. Great guy. He came in with this idea, and now, nobody had anybody idea it was going to work like this. There's never been anything that worked like this. It's incredible what's going with Opportunity Zones—brandnew—which give churches and investors more ways to rebuild distressed communities. And last year, with the help of many faith leaders, I signed groundbreaking criminal justice reform into law. And if you remember, Sleepy Joe Biden—he's the one—he was pushing it. [Laughter] And that was a killer for Hillary Clinton. And I remember, the first time I saw people—real activists—against Hillary, because of her husband and what they did on criminal justice reform, and they did nothing to fix it. What they did, it was terrible: the crime act. What they did was terrible to so many people. And we got criminal justice reform passed with very conservative people and very liberal people. I mean, it was an amazing thing.

We're glad to be joined today by the first person released from prison under the First Step Act, Matthew Charles. Where's Matthew? Thank you, Matthew. That was very unfair what happened to Matthew and many other people—many other people. And we're very tough on crime, but what happened to some people was very unfair. So it's really great that you're here, Matthew, and I hear you're doing phenomenally well.

We have repeatedly asked the Democrats to close these loopholes and to save the lives of young immigrants. I mean, they're too busy interviewing people on the Russian witch hunt, on the hoax. If they spent a little bit less time on the Russian witch hunt—which turned out to be a total phony deal. Actually, they're the ones that committed the crime, as it turned out. If they spent some time on that, they could solve the loophole problem in an hour, they could solve the asylum problem in an hour, and we'd have no problem whatsoever at the border.

They don't want to do it. They want things to look bad, they want open borders. Open borders mean crime, means human trafficking. Human trafficking—mostly women. Okay? Human trafficking. This is like prehistoric—a word like that, "trafficking." Who would think?

They want that wall, that's being built right now. [cheers and applause] They want that wall, and they really do. They understand the border better than anybody. And they don't want criminals coming in, they don't want crime coming. They don't want to lose their jobs. They like the fact that their salaries are going up, their wages are going up. They understand it better.
On the issue of everything, a lot of issues, Democrats have put the needs of foreign citizens far ahead of our own citizens. Nowhere in this world is there anything like what's happening with immigration, how bad it is. The Democrats, open border policies, deplete our public services, overcrowd our schools and hospitals, and bring crime, drugs and deadly gangs into our community.
You can't say you love our country if you want to destroy it through open borders. Open borders are a disaster. Human trafficking, you know, the first time I heard as a politician human trafficking, nobody talks about it. It sounded almost like an ancient crime, many many years ago, hundreds of years, thousands of years ago.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, intolerance and division.
But they want to virtually, and you know this, you know this, they want virtual immunity for illegal aliens who have committed horrible crimes and murder. [booing]  Horrible crimes and murder. Republicans believe our cities should be a sanctuary for law abiding Americans, not criminal aliens. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, and they’re the party, frankly, of socialism. [booing]
As we restore our prosperity, we are also restoring public safety. We are fighting to reduce violent crime. You see so much, and over the last 25 years, so much crime. And ensure that every American can live in safety and peace. And yet with all that you see, we’ve had one of the best years of crime prevention that we’ve ever had. It wouldn’t seem that way, but it is one of the best years because those gentlemen that we just saw, the law enforcement, they do a great job. [cheers and applause]
Yet Democrats want to open borders and Republicans want strong borders. That you’re difference. One wants open borders. Who can even think of an open border? Think of it? Even though many people that come into our country are wonderful people, they’re are still coming in illegally. They’re not coming in through merit. But what about the bad ones? We have serious, serious criminals that want to come in, and if we had open borders, they would be flowing in like you’ve never seen before. Democrats want open borders, they don’t mind crime. We do mind crime and that’s the way it is. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion and socialism. [booing]
The charges against these freed criminals include sexual assault, robbery, drug crimes, kidnapping, and homicide. Murder. [shouting] Why would you do it? Why would you do it? What is it? Explain it. Just recently, Mecklenburg County set free an illegal alien charged with first-degree rape and crimes against a child. Support for sanctuary cities is disloyalty to American citizens, and McCready wants sanctuary cities with all of their protections for people that are serious criminals.
Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth, and if you look at Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, he was even talking about essentially you would say an execution. He was talking after the baby is born, the doctor will talk to the mother and they'll make the decision as to whether or not that baby lives. This is a radical Democrat idea. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. They're socialists. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. Every day they're making good on the motto, "promises made, promises kept." In fact, we are keeping even more promises by far than we made, or than we promised. So many more. So many more. So many more.
The President. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it is the party of the American dream. [cheers and applause] We've achieved record funding for the US military. All of that money, trillions and trillions of dollars spent, all produced right here in the good old USA. [cheers and applause] And I have to tell you, New Mexico, I know you're gonna like this. A lot of those trillions because you know when you do the 716 and the 730 and the 700 billion, all of a sudden you're in trillions and I can save a lot of lines when I just say trillions. A lot of that money's going to be spent in the state-of-the-art military equipment that's being used at Holloman Air Force Base, White Sands Missile Range—[cheers and applause]—Kirkland Air Force Base, and many other vital New Mexico military installations that are going up as we speak.
The do-nothing Democrat extremists have gone so far left that they believe it should not be a crime to cross our border illegally, and it should be a crime to have a totally appropriate, casual, beautiful, accurate phone call with a foreign leader. I don't think so. As our brilliant White House counsel wrote to the Democrats yesterday, he said, "Their highly partisan and unconstitutional effort threatens grave and lasting damage to our democratic institutions, to our system of free elections, and to the American people." That's what it is. To the American people. It's so terrible.
The President. A brand new report just came out as I'm walking on the stage. Hard to believe, actually. It turns out that Joe Biden was vice president, he worked with the so-called whistleblower. [booing] This is nothing but a partisan witch hunt, sabotage, and I'm sure they're going to say it's totally unsubstantiated, but one of them wrote this story. Congratulations, by the way. That's very nice. That's really good. That's the way you should do it. Good. Good. Good. In the twisted worldview of Democrats and the media, it's okay for politicians to ship our jobs to foreign countries, flood our communities with drugs and crime, and enrich themselves at America's expense. Their treachery is allowed because they go along with the rigged Washington game, and it is far more rigged. When I ran, I thought it was rigged, but this is crazy what's happening. But if you refuse to bow or bend to the Washington swamp, which I could do very easily, I'd be much more popular. Folks, it would be so much easier. [booing]
You never ever ... Please. Always just assume you're a little behind, but we're going to win this state by so much that people are going to be shocked. And plenty of other states too. You know, we had a rally three weeks ago in New Mexico, and New Mexico's a hard state for Republicans, hasn't been won in a long time also. And we had receptivity that was unbelievable. The audience was 40% Hispanic, where we're doing great. [cheers and applause] And you know, Hispanic, they understand borders better than anybody, better than we do. They understand safety, they understand their job, they don't want people taking it away, they don't want crime. They understand it better. That's why we're doing so well, but we're in New Mexico, and I'm telling you, that was electric. But honestly, all evenings are electric. We haven't had any bad ones. We haven't. They're all electric. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant Washington corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it's the party of the American Dream. [cheers and applause]
The Democrats are fighting to restore the wretched political class that threw open our nation's borders, shipped away our jobs, sacrificed our wealth, surrendered our sovereignty, flooded our cities with drugs and crime and bogged us down in one foreign war after another. The endless wars have to stop. Have to stop. [applause] We're directly taking on the unholy alliance of corrupt Democrat politicians, deep state bureaucrats and the fake news media. There they are right there. [booing] You know, it's really funny, I see all those red lights on. That means, you're live. Right? As soon as I start talking about the fake news, I see those lights go off so fast, but then they come back on. And you know why they come back on because last night, by far, all over the cable, all over the place, the highest rated show was what we did in Minnesota, a state that we're going to win. [applause] That's why they come back on because they had no choice. They may hate Trump, but they want to get those ratings. Hey, what's going to happen in 12, maybe 16 years? When I'm no longer President. See, I'm just driving up here. Their ratings are going to tank. I actually think they're going to endorse me. Because if they don't, can you imagine having Pocahontas as your president? [booing] Now, the real Pocahontas we wouldn't have minded, but the fake Pocahontas you can't have. Or how about sleepy Joe? [booing]
Nervous Nancy. I used to think she loved the country; she hates the country because she wouldn't be doing this to the country if she did. She hates the country; Nancy Pelosi hates the United States of America because she wouldn't be doing this. And I'm telling you, foreign nations, foreign people looking at us. They honestly think we're nuts. And then you have Presidents and saying nothing was wrong. The President of the country. That's in question. But Nancy Pelosi said, "Well, that's what he said. Isn't it?" But she was angry as hell when she got to read the transcript. Because she said, "Wait a minute, that's not what I was told." But she was stuck, she was stuck. But think of a guy, who makes up a phone call, makes up my words, viciously says, eight quid pro quos. In other words, you got to do this and we're not going to do that. And there were none. There were none. They couldn't believe it when I released that call. I would have loved to have seen their faces. And then he goes before the United States Congress and before the American public and he makes up the story of what I said. Made it horrible and vicious, not even close. It's not like, "Gee, he missed a couple of words." He missed every word, he missed every. He made it up, it was fiction. It's unbelievable. And honestly, I don't know Congressman, but are you immune from something like that? That should be a crime. That should be a crime. [applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports, late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up to the moment of birth. That's why, I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party–the American worker, the American family and the American dream, that's what they want. Republicans want the American dream. [applause]
And now it is the outrageous impeachment—look, impeachment. I never thought I'd see or hear that word with regard to me—"impeachment." [Laughter] I said, the other day, "It's an ugly word." To me, it's an ugly word, a very ugly word. It means so much. It means horrible, horrible crimes and things. I can't even believe it.

To protect the well-being of our citizens, we're fighting violent crime—securing our border, building the wall. And it is going up rapidly, by the way. Rapidly. You think that was an easy one? That was a tough one. And it's the—I said the "Rolls-Royce." They criticized me on that. They said that car is not made in the United States. I said, "We're building the Rolls-Royce of walls."

Crazy Nancy. Think of that. That crazy Nancy. She is crazy. [booing] And Shifty Schiff. How about this guy? How about this guy? [booing] He makes up my conversation, which was perfect. He makes up my conversation. He sees what I said. It doesn't play well because it was perfect. So he made up a totally false conversation with the Ukrainian president—[booing]—and we caught him cold. Everybody knew it anyway. See, we did one thing. You always have to do the unexpected. They never thought I'd release the conversation with the Ukrainian president. [cheers and applause] I wanna get him before Congress and I wanna see what he has to say. You know, they say he has immunity. Why would you have immunity for outright fraud? Why do you have immunity? Why? He's a fraud. We're fighting a campaign against leftists, socialists, and globalists who wanna return to reckless wars, open borders, rampant crime, and totally disastrous one-way trade deals. We're changing that one around very quickly. [cheers and applause]
The President. But the do-nothing Democrats believe anyone who opposes them has to be crushed. They don't wanna just beat them. They don't wanna just beat them. These are sick people. They wanna crush these people. The anger, the hatred, and that any lie or crime or corruption is justified, so Schiff gets up and makes up my statement. He makes it up 100% and then he said he didn't speak to the whistleblower. No, we didn't see the whistleblower. And what about the whistleblower? The whistleblower got it all wrong. Who's the whistleblower? Who's the whistleblower? Who is the whistleblower? We have to know. Is the whistleblower a spy? And who is the IG that did this? All he had to do is look at the tape or look at what they wrote down, the transcribed version of the phone call. Compare that to the whistleblower's account and you see it had nothing to do with it. So why does the IG allow a thing like this to happen to our country? Why? Why? [shouting]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that crackpot governor from Virginia executes the baby after birth. You saw that, right? After birth. You remember that one from last year. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of crazy politicians, high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. They're corrupt, like Schiff is corrupt. He's corrupt. [shouting]
Four days from now, this state will head to the polls and vote to continue our extraordinary progress with your next governor, Republican Tate Reeves. Great guy. Great guy. [cheers and applause] Under Republican leadership, jobs are booming, confidence is soaring, wages are rising, crime is falling, and our nation is stronger than ever before. We're now an economic powerhouse. We've never been in a position like it. We've rebuilt our military and we have financial strength. And by the way, for those of you with a thing called 401(k)s—[cheers and applause]—the stock market hit, today, another all-time historic high. [cheers and applause]
To protect our communities, my administration restricted migration from terror-prone nations and implemented the toughest ever vetting procedures. Toughest ever that we've ever had. No issue has ever been so horribly discarded by a party as that issue by the Democrats. They want open borders, which mean crime. They want sanctuary cities, which means crime and drugs and death. After bleeding the middle class dry, Democrats threw open our borders to the world, flooding our communities with poisonous drugs and criminal cartels. Republicans believe in strong borders and safe communities. We are now building a wall.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream. Nobody has done more for the African-American community than the Republican party. [cheers and applause] And we're also the party of Abraham Lincoln. We can't forget that. People forget. Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Look, he's such a pain, when he needs something for Kentucky like money, like aid, like, he wants me to call one of the many manufacturers now that are coming into Kentucky, "Could you call the head of some company in Japan, please?" I say, "Matt, do I have to do it?" "Please, please." But isn't that really what you want in a governor? [cheers and applause] That's what you want. [cheers and applause] He's such a pain in the ass, but that's what you want. [cheers and applause] And the job he's done, one of the best in the country. Not the best. He's been incredible. Matt is strong on crime and tough on illegal immigration. Thank you. [cheers and applause] He's pro-worker, pro-life, and 100% pro-Second Amendment. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from their mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [booing] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and it's the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. We forgot that. Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] The incredible rebuilding of our military includes over 100 billion-dollar investments all across the state of Kentucky.
The President. So, is there any place you would rather be than at a Trump rally on a beautiful, wonderful evening in Louisiana? [applause] I don't even know. Would you rather be at LSU versus Alabama or a Trump rally? Let's take the Trump rally. [applause] But Democrats must be accountable for their hoaxes and for their crimes. Now, corrupt politicians, Nancy Pelosi and shifty Adam Schiff —[booing]— and the crooked media have launched the deranged, delusional, destructive, and hyper-partisan impeachment witch hunt. [booing] Now, we go again except, a lot of things have happened because, you know, I don't know if you saw, I just got off -- I'm coming off the plane and they hand me, look at this guy right there, OK. They just hand me the story, coup has started, whistleblower's attorney said in 2017. Do you know when that was?
With John Bel Edwards, you will soon have a sanctuary city in your midst —[booing]— but the Democrats -- think of it. They want open borders, which means crime. Now, look at what's going on in Mexico, and I'll tell you what, I have to thank the Mexican government in one way, 27,000 soldiers, but they have other problems. These cartels are a tremendous problem, we're building and we are building a wall. That wall is going up and it's going up. [applause] Our military is now building the wall and it's going up fast. The Army Corps of Engineers and it's going up and it's doing great, it's doing great. It should have been built years ago. That wall should have been built many years ago, never did. They never could figure it out, but I figured it out. It wasn't easy. I had 100% of the other party fighting me. 100%. Do you think that's easy? And you know, we had a majority of a few people, very little, very little. We needed Democrat votes, but we had 100% of the people, and I made one mistake.
Eddie is tough on crime, strong on borders, and he'll work with ICE and Border Patrol to get violent criminals off the streets. We'll bring them back to their country ideally or we'll put them in jail where they belong. [applause] Eddie is pro-energy, pro-family, pro-life, and pro-Second Amendment totally. [applause] Eddie will defend your values from the all-out assault by the extreme left. That's what they are. They're the extreme left. I call them AOC-plus-three. AOC, that's a real beauty. You only have eleven years to live, folks, eleven years, because climate change is just coming up on us so fast. You know, it's 12 years but today, I heard one of these crazies say, it's down to eleven, and they arrested Jane Fonda. Nothing changes. I remember 30, 40 years ago. They're -- she always has the handcuffs on. Oh man, she's waving to everybody with the handcuffs. I can't believe it. They -- remember that? She went to Vietnam to find out how nice they were. They weren't too nice to her by the way. No, they arrested her today, Jane Fonda, nothing changes. They arrest every, every, 25 years, they arrest her.
Edwards is totally owned by the Liberal trial lawyers, who are causing your state insurance rates and car insurance to skyrocket through the roof. Perhaps, most disturbing, Edwards has allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of dollars and healthcare from hardworking Louisiana citizens. [booing] He cares more about illegal aliens than he cares about Louisiana citizens. I'll tell what, I love our military, Eddie loves our military. [applause] They care more about illegal aliens than taking care of our vets and taking care of our military. Edwards is dangerously soft on crime, you know that.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. It's also the party of the late great Abraham Lincoln, people forget. We have confirmed already 158 incredible judges to interpret the Constitution as written, including two great Supreme Court Justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. [applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. They're corrupt. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
But Americans have so much to be thankful for the economy is booming, wages are rising, crime is falling, poverty is plummeting, confidence is soaring and America is Stronger than ever before—[cheers and applause]—we've created six point seven million new jobs, including 600,000 jobs right here in the great state of Florida—[applause]—we're protecting American workers taking care of our amazing veterans--by the way you know the veterans for years and years and years I was like you I was a civilian, I love my life, my life was so much simpler. [laughter]
But the lies of the Democrats are being exposed. Their schemes are unraveling--their crimes--and that's what it is, crimes. Did you ever hear this guy corrupt politician, Schiff? He made up my statement—[booing]—to the Ukrainian President. He made it up. These are crooked people, but their crimes are being revealed and their sinister plans are failing at a level that nobody thought even me possible [applause].
That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God [cheers and applause]. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream and remember this the Republican Party is the party of Abraham Lincoln. We forget. Abraham Lincoln, and I've always heard that the most important thing a President can do is the appointment of judges. I say maybe the military, because without the military we're not so interested in judges, right. So, I think maybe the military, but we've done a great job with that totally rebuild.
And now after two and a half years, now that the Russia witch hunt is dead, a big fat disgusting fraud, the Congressional Democrats are pushing the impeachment witch hunt having to do with Ukraine—[booing]—but that's already failing. You saw their so-called articles of impeachment today, people are saying they're not even a crime. What happened? All of these horrible things, remember? Bribery and this and that. Where are they? They send these two things, their not even a crime. This is the lightest, weakest impeachment--our country has had actually many impeachments, you recall judges and lots of--many impeachments, but it was on today, everybody said, "This is impeachment light." This is the lightest impeachment in the history of our country by far. It's not even like an impeachment. These people are stone cold crooked. When a guy like shifty Schiff, he's a corrupt politician—[booing]—he made up my statement because--see, I did one thing very good, as soon as I heard about this deal, I released my statement immediately, but he had already made horrible statements. And by the way, the whistleblower, the whistleblower defrauded our country because the whistleblower wrote something that was totally untrue and we broke up the game. Remember the second whistleblower was coming, right? And then the informer, who is the informer? I know who the informer is. So, the informer obviously gave him a false information because they wrote in the whistleblower report, they wrote something totally different from what I said, what I said was perfect. But it screwed up the whole works because most guys would never do that. They didn't even know probably that we had it transcribed, professionally transcribed, word for word transcribed, so beautiful. Am I lucky I had it transcribed? Think of that. Think of that.
But today, the House Democrats announced these two flimsy, pathetic, ridiculous articles of impeachment. The House Democrats are walking back from everything they claimed. With today's announcement, they're now admitting there was no collusion, there was no obstruction of justice, and there were no crimes whatsoever. There are no crimes. It says it, there are no crimes. They're impeaching me and there are no crimes. This has to be a first in history. They're impeaching me. You know why? Because they want to win an election. And that's the only way they can do it.
So, the Democrats have nothing, and they've turned the somber process of impeachment. And it was, you know, to me, impeachment is a very ugly word. It's a word I associate with some very bad times in our country. The good news is we're having the best times in history in our country. [applause] Okay? But the word impeachment, to me, is a very, very ugly word. It's a dark, ugly word. But, but I have to tell you, as bad as it is, it meant something. When you had serious high crimes and misdemeanors, when you had serious, go ahead, it's impeachment. That would happen every 50 years, every 40 years, every 100 years. This was a big deal. They're making it so like, "Let's do it every six months." They've cheapened a process. They've cheapened a process. These people are so bad, the radical left Democrats, and I actually think that Pelosi, who by the way, by the way—[booing]—by the way, she has totally lost control. She has totally--it's being run now by this crazy AOC plus three. AOC plus three. Now it's being run by other people. The far left has, has just grabbed that party. It is so sad to see. And she knew what would happen. I didn't, because I didn't figure the polls would go through the roof. They went out today. In Michigan, in Wisconsin, in a place called Pennsylvania. No, no. The polls are through the roof. They're called swing states, very important states. We won Pennsylvania the last time, and we're going to win it again, but even bigger. [applause]
Democrats' sanctuary cities also give safe haven to those who commit violent sex crimes. Since Montgomery County, Maryland declared itself a sanctuary jurisdiction in July, we have already identified nine illegal aliens who have been arrested for rape, sexual assault, including a 26-year-old man charged with raping and viciously strangling a young, wonderful woman who was entering her apartment, innocently entering her apartment. She was raped and killed, strangled to death. Sanctuary city. Maryland. But these are only the cases we know about. Sanctuary cities and jails actively conceal illegal alien crime and criminals from federal government. Federal government wants to take them out, or in some cases, if it's real violence, and we don't want to pay for the cost, but we do, put them into very strong jails. The sanctuary city of Philadelphia. The sanctuary city in Philadelphia—[booing]—is one of the very worst sanctuaries anywhere in America. Did you know that? I mean, I know Philadelphia well. Going to school here, we never heard about sanctuary cities, did we?
You better get yourself a new prosecutor in this place, I want to tell you. That's a horrible thing. No, it's a national story, how he wants everybody to not pay the price. And you're talking about not paying the price for rape, for murder, for other horrible crimes. How stupid--how stupid can you be? The charges against this alien include rape, aggravated indecent assault, unlawful contact with a minor, indecent exposure, and terroristic threats. Other than that, he was a very nice person. Philadelphia has defied ICE and released illegals charged with everything from assault, to kidnapping, to drug crimes, to sex crimes, to homicide murder.
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law and order, and we stand for justice. We stand for justice. [applause] We side with law enforcement and with law-abiding Americans, not ruthless gang members and not violent criminals, aliens that come into our country illegally. They take our payments. Payments. Some of these people with these crazy laws that you have. Look at what's going on in California. They do better than our great veterans. They do better than citizens of our country. And they advertise, "We will take you. We will take care of you. We will pay for it." And then you wonder why we have so many people trying to come through at the borders. But we do a great job. We're removing these criminal illegal aliens from our country by the thousands. We're sending them home, and we're not letting them come back in. We're being very tough. [applause] And Mexico is now giving us 27,000 soldiers at our border. And Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, we signed a very important agreement with each. When their people come into our country, they weren't taking them back. Now they take them back and they say, "Thank you very much." They weren't taking them back. If we had a murderer from Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, we want to bring them back under past administrations. They bring them and they say, "We don't want them. Don't land your plane with us." They say, "Thank you very much. We will take them back." Because we've let them know the price is very bad if they don't do that.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the party of honest Abe Lincoln. [applause] Party of Abe Lincoln.
So, I said in my letter to Pelosi--I love that. You know, usually there's one, two. The Republicans, look, I've said it for a long time. The Democrats are lousy politicians, they really are. They've got horrible policies, open borders, crime is fine, drugs pouring through. I mean, think of what they do. Sanctuary cities, they love sanctuary cities, you know. They're lousy politicians, but they have one thing--two things. They are vicious. They're the most vicious people. The Republicans aren't as vicious. They may learn to be vicious after going through this, though. But the other thing, the Democrats always stick together. Now think of it, three Democrats went over to our side, no Republicans. It's unheard of. [applause]
But what they've done with this perversion, it's perversion. And when you watch some of these people get up and speak today, they don't even, "You have violated the Constitution." "Well, what does he done wrong?" "Well, we don't know that." They don't even have any crime. This is the first impeachment where there's no crime. I say, "Tell me what I did, please." "Well, we don't know. You violated the Constitution." You had Turley, who's smart, Alan Dershowitz, these guys. All of them, they said, "There's no crime. There's no crime," right? There's no crime! I'm the first person that ever get impeached, and there's no crime. I feel guilty. You know what they call it? Impeachment light. It's impeachment light. That's why, you know with Richard Nixon, I just see it as a very dark era, very dark, very--oh, you don't even like to think. I don't know about you, but I'm having a good time, it's crazy. [applause] But I also know we have a great group of people behind us in the Republican Party, we really do. Maybe I wouldn't feel the same way, but we have a great group of people behind us. We had in the House, and we have it in the Senate. They're doing a great job, so I'm not worried. I'm not worried, because it's always good when you don't do anything wrong, you get impeached. That may be a record that will last forever. But you know what they have done? They've cheapened the impeachment process. And now anybody that become--this is a sacred position. Anybody that becomes president, I mean, they could have a phone call and they get impeached. So, if the Republicans--if you had a Democrat as president, we have a Republican house, they don't like the guy for whatever reason, or the woman, they impeach the person. It's cheapened it. It's exactly what our founding fathers didn't want, and they said it could happen, and it's happened.
In June, two illegal aliens in Sandusky, Michigan were convicted of sadistically beating and stabbing a woman to death with a kitchen knife. Then, they hid her body in a water drain. A criminal alien with two previous deportations was just arrested in Michigan and convicted of brutally beating and strangling to death, a single mother of five young children. It's happening all the time. Far left politicians support deadly sanctuary cities, which deliberately release dangerous, violent criminal aliens out of the jails and directly onto your streets. You know we had a great election in North Carolina recently, two great congressmen got elected, you don't hear about it, when they win, you don't ever hear about it, just a few months ago. Two great people and they got elected and they got elected because I went in at the end and said, "You don't talk about the fact that you have sanctuary cities" and they had some horrible crimes happening from those sanctuary cities. Soon as I mentioned that boom, they went up like rocket ships and they won their elections, and it was great. Great thing.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. And that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. And that's really what it is. We're also the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. A lot of people forget that, but we have to bring it up. To protect the health and safety of our citizens, we awarded $100 million to improve water infrastructure in Flint. How badly was Flint? Who was, who were the geniuses that did that to you? You have clean water coming into Flint. They had to pay a very tiny little fee. So, instead, they go into this horrible, horrible, really polluted water and the water comes out of there. They spend hundreds of millions of dollars to save like a couple of bucks, and the water was so terrible, and it hurt the people. It hurt the people. But we're getting it fixed. And I know your previous governor was a Republican, but I was not a big fan of his. I was not, but I'm not a big fan of the one that can't fix the potholes either.
And yet, now I see the radical left Democrats have expressed outrage over the termination—[booing]—of this horrible terrorist. [booing] And you know, instead they should be outraged by Soleimani's savage crimes and the fact that his countless victims were denied justice for so long. You know, he was the king of the roadside bomb. You know of the roadside bomb, and then they got bigger, and he'd send them over to Afghanistan and Iraq. And when you see our friends and our great wounded warriors and our great warriors, when you see them without their legs, or without an arm, and with so much damage, it's most likely that he caused that damage, because that's what he liked. He loved planting the roadside bomb. So now he's gone, and that's a good thing. [cheers and applause]
The President. Far-left radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities and demonstrated their contempt, scorn, and disdain for everyday Americans and the American family. These jurisdictions release dangerous violent criminal aliens out of their jails and directly onto your streets where they are free to rob, attack, and kill American citizens, but we stop it. They want open borders. Can you believe it? And because of Democrats' open border policies, they want open borders. They want people flowing. Come on in. Come on in. Innocent Americans are being brutalized and murdered by illegal alien criminals. As just one example right here in Ohio, you all know about it, an illegal alien went on a deadly crime spree, attempting to rape a 14-year-old girl. Then raping and murdering a 60-year-old woman. Then shooting another woman who took a shortcut through the park and was walking with her children. And finally the police came. We love our police. And they were able to apprehend this terrible criminal.
But Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice. That's really the way it is. [cheers and applause] We side with law enforcement, with law-abiding Americans, not law-breaking criminal aliens. We are removing these illegal criminals and gang members from our country by the thousands. We are sending them home. And we will not let them back in. And I have to tell you, a lot of things are happening. You're gonna hear about that in two seconds. Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, illegal crossings are down 75% since May. [cheers and applause] We have ended catch and release. Catch and release, you know what catch and release is? We catch them. We take down their name and we release them. What kind of crap is that? [shouting] These are the policies that we inherited. You catch somebody, you take their name. Say "Please come back in three years." Right? And we release them into our country. And if you don't do that everybody gets sued. Can you believe this? We have ended catch and release.
But they wanna have open borders. They wanna have sanctuary cities. The radical Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. They are stone cold crazy. [shouting] You know, it's interesting, as I'm saying this stuff. You know, they want crime, they want chaos. I'm saying all this stuff and then I say, "Gee, now I sort of understand why they hate me." Right? But it's true. It's true. Their policies are a disaster. They're bad politicians and they have horrible policies but what they do is they stick together and then they're vicious. They're vicious, horrible people. I didn't use to say that. They're horrible people. What they do to people is a disgrace but they stick together.
Radical Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the party of the American dream. We still have that American dream. [cheers and applause]
And the Democrats should be outraged by Soleimani's evil crimes, not the decision to end his wretched life. They're saying, "Well, he was a General. He was this. He was that." You know what? Number one, he wasn't supposed to be there. He was a designated terrorist—by President Obama who didn't do anything about it, as usual. [booing] As usual. They don't do anything. They designate ,and they don't do anything about. He should've been killed 20 years ago. [applause]
Last year, ICE—I love ICE. I think they're so great. [cheers and applause] You know, they moved thousands of MS-13 out of our country. Thousands, and others too. But ICE officers in this region of our country arrested nearly 7,000 illegal aliens with criminal records. So,you have 7,000 illegal aliens having criminal records, including those charged or convicted of murder, burglary, robbery, drug crimes, killings in the most violent way. Right here in Wisconsin, cities run by far-left politicians are releasing dangerous criminal aliens who abuse, assault and threaten innocent children. Your children. [booing]
Democrats stand for crime, corruption and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order and justice. It's true. It's true. [cheers and applause] We believe Wisconsin should be a sanctuary for law-abiding Americans, not for criminal aliens. [applause] We are removing these illegal criminals and gang members by the tens of thousands, and we will not let them back. And we made a deal with Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Mexico, where they accept them back. Under the Obama administration, they get 'em, they'd bring 'em back. And Honduras and Guatemala, would say "get the hell—we're not taking them back." But with us, they take 'em back. They take 'em back. [applause] Very great.
The President. Well, I don't know anything about the letter. But certainly, Rudy is one of the great crime fighters in the history of our country. He's certainly probably the best over the last 50 years. He was also the greatest mayor in the history of the city of New York. I think Rudy was truly an outstanding mayor.

As an example, his endorsement of Bloomberg got Bloomberg elected. He wouldn't have even been mayor. But Rudy was the greatest crime fighter. And Rudy is somebody that, frankly, having him on my side was a great honor for me, and it has been a great honor for me.

Rudy Giuliani—Rudy Giuliani did a phenomenal job over a long period of time in fighting crime. And frankly, he's a very legitimate guy, a very straight shooter. I didn't know about a specific letter, but if he wrote a letter, it wouldn't have been a big deal. Rudy was always in—it was very important to Rudy that I be a great President, and that's okay with me. It was very important to a lot of people, because our country was going to hell, and now our country is on a path that we haven't seen in decades and decades. We've never done better.

But on no issue have Washington Democrats thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of immigration. [shouting] Left-wing, radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities—[booing]—and remember, a sanctuary city is a jurisdiction that refuses to hand over criminal aliens that are in local law enforcement custody. Instead, they order them to be released into your community. What the hell is going on? [booing] What is going on? And once set loose, these criminal aliens are free to continue their crime spree against innocent Americans. Right here in New Jersey, your state's Democrat leaders have instituted sanctuary policies that result in dangerous predators being set free into your community. [booing]
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice, and say what you want, but those are the facts. [cheers and applause] And we are removing these illegal criminals and gang members. We are literally taking them by so many, thousands and thousands, and we're bringing them back. And thanks to our tireless efforts of border patrol to secure our border, we have reduced illegal border crossings seven straight months in a row. We have the numbers down by 75% since spring, 75%. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. Look at what's happening to their cities. Los Angeles, it's so sad. What you see is so sad with the homeless and the way they don't take care of the homeless. San Francisco, you could take a ... Starting in New York. You could take a look at what's happening to our cities run by Democrats. It's a disaster. They don't know what the hell they're doing. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
In this region of the county alone, last year, ICE officers arrested nearly 4,000 illegal aliens charged or convicted of heinous crimes, including robbery, rape, and murder.
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice. It's true. [cheers and applause] We are finding the illegal game members, drug dealers, predators, and we are throwing them the hell out of our country, ideally. And we don't wanna put them in prison because you know what? We gotta pay for them for the next 50 years, but sometimes we have to. If they're too dangerous we have no choice.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. No matter how you cut it, that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. You know that, right? Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Anyway, Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. It's true. And our numbers with African-American workers, people, are through the roof. Are through the roof because-- [cheers and applause] Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose?" I'd read the down the worst on crime, the worst on education. They got this, they got that, they got 10 different things, all horrible. And one day I'm in front of this tremendous group of people and I'm reading this list, African-American, they have the highest crime rate, they have the highest this, they have the worst education, they have the worst schools, they have the worst-- I said, "Stay with me," because they were with the Democrats for a hundred years, more. I said, "Stay with me. What the hell do you have to lose?"
Madam Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States, and my fellow citizens: Three years ago, we launched the great American comeback. Tonight, I stand before you to share the incredible results. Jobs are booming, incomes are soaring, poverty is plummeting, crime is falling, confidence is surging, and our country is thriving and highly respected again. America's enemies are on the run, America's fortunes are on the rise, and America's future is blazing bright.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? Abraham Lincoln. [applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total destruction of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, the Second Amendment, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? [cheers and applause] Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background, every community, and every walk of life. We are the party of boundless optimism, excitement, energy, and enthusiasm. We have tremendous energy. Tremendous energy. [cheers and applause]
The President. He's agreeing. No more censorship is right. No more evil. No more crimes. You're right. From Yuma to Mesa, and from Flagstaff to right here in Phoenix—[cheers and applause]—we stand on the shoulders of red-blooded American patriots who poured their heart, sweat, and soul to secure our liberty and to defend our freedom. Arizona was founded by pioneers and prospectors, great prospectors, cowboys and miners and ranchers who tamed the wilderness, braved the blazing sun, and it is hot here. I've been here during the summer. I wanna tell you, it's seriously hot. [laughter] Of course, didn't they say that President Clinton, when he went on the back of the plane, was here to play golf, it was 121 degrees that day? I don't know about that. I don't know about that. What do you think he was doing with the Attorney General? I remember he said, "Oh, I just happened to see she was— I was here to play golf. It was 120 degrees out." I don't know.
In Denver, an illegal alien was recently charged with brutally stabbing a judge multiple times, attempting to murder him his own home. The alien had been arrested 36 times over the past 20 years. Other than that, other than that, he was a very fine fellow, for crimes including assault and child abuse, yet somehow they kept letting him go and he was still in our country. In communities across the nation, radical, and we're watching them very closely, left-wing politicians are imposing deadly sanctuary cities, and sanctuary states, and policies that compel local law enforcement to release these illegal aliens straight into your beautiful communities. [booing] Last year, Colorado Democrats enacted a law declaring this entire state to be a sanctuary for dangerous criminal aliens. [booing]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. That's what it is. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] People forget that. People forget Honest Abe. He's the most presidential guy, right? I've always said I could be more presidential than anybody, but I'm not sure I can beat Honest Abe when he wears the hat. That hat is too much. It's so easy to be presidential, so easy. It's so much easier than doing what I have to do, but you know what I'd have? I'd have about three people in the front row. [laughter]
We catch them, and we take some information and we release them in, and we say, "Please report back in four years from now for your trial." And about 2% come back, and they're the ones that are the dumbest people I've ever seen. [laughter] 2%. Nobody comes back. It's crazy, but we're getting a change. It would be so easy. They call it loopholes. Loopholes. That word alone, they call it loopholes. It would be so easy if we had some Democrat support. We don't have any Democrat support. They want open borders. They don't care about crime. Border Patrol has seized the largest amount of deadly narcotics ever in the history of our country this last year. We have deported record numbers of gang members. We are building the wall faster than ever, and we will soon be building more than one mile a day. [cheers and applause]
We're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in so doing. Virtually every Democrat candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause] The Democrat Party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and of course the late, great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
Our economy is roaring, jobs are booming, opportunity is soaring, poverty is plummeting, crime is falling, and America is stronger today than ever before. Stronger today. Our military is incredible. We have rebuilt our incredible U.S. military, revived our industrial might, and restored our standing in the world. America is respected again, respected like never before. [Applause] True.
Last year, California sanctuary law forced a single county to release over 1,000 convicted criminal aliens, and nearly 240 have already been arrested, and they're looking for others. And those are just the crimes that we know about. Montgomery County, Maryland, announced a sanctuary policy last July. Since then, at least 10 illegal immigrants have been arrested for sex crimes, including the rape of an 11-year-old girl.
Last year alone, sanctuary jurisdictions in North Carolina ... How did that happen to North Carolina? Deliberately set free hundreds and hundreds of dan-... And these are really dangerous criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of burglary, gun crime, sexual assault, kidnapping, and even murder. Gotta change it. [shouting] Your Democrat Governor, Roy Cooper, vetoed a bill that would save North Carolina lives and ban sanctuary cities in your state. [booing] What is he thinking? But while your super-liberal governor is putting your families at risk, your Republican Senator Thom Tillis has introduced a bill allowing American victims to sue sanctuary cities for the horrible pain, anguish, and suffering they inflict on our people. [cheers and applause]
The Democratic party is the party of high taxes, high crime, unlimited regulations, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
Joe Biden and the Democrats wanna prosecute Americans for going to church, but not for burning a church. [booing] They believe you can riot, vandalize, and destroy, but you cannot attend a peaceful pro-America rally. [booing] They wanna punish your thought, but not their violent crimes. They wanna abolish bail, abolish and open up your borders. They want open borders, let everyone, and by the way, we're doing so well. We have a record this month on the borders. Nobody's coming in. Very few people. [cheers and applause] And they wanna abolish ICE, our great people from ICE who send the roughest, toughest, meanest people that you've ever seen or ever heard.
We will forever remember and honor the courageous people who helped build this state and this country. Democrats are stoking division in order to distract from their decades of failure on schools, jobs, housing, justice, and crime. In major city public schools run by Democrats, over two thirds of students are falling behind in reading and math. And I think the numbers are worse than that. But Democrats would rather deny these children the future they deserve than allow them to attend the charter, public, private, religious, or independent schools of their choice. Pro-choice, pro-choice. [cheers and applause] Pro-choice for schools. It's very popular, but some people it's, like, a disaster because what it does to certain unions that have a lot of power over the Democrats, even though they know it's wrong.
Republicans believe access to education is a civil right. It's a civil right. [cheers and applause] Twenty of 20 of the most dangerous cities in America are controlled by Democrats. Think of that, 20 of 20. And so is nearly every major city with a child poverty rate that's over 30%. They're controlled by Democrats. We can name every one of them. The murder rate in Baltimore and Detroit is higher than El Salvador, Guatemala, or even Afghanistan. How they doing, the Democrats running those cities? Your whole country will be like that. In 2018 alone, our police arrested nearly 12,000 people for murder and manslaughter, 25,000 people for rape, and nearly 1.5 million for assault, violent assault. The Democrats' push against our police will drive up crime and drive up costs at levels you'd never believe. Thousands of innocent lives will be lost. As president, I will always support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. [cheers and applause]
They want to abolish cash bail, releasing 400,000 criminals onto our streets. Think of no–no more cash bail. Look at what happened in New York. Cuomo ended cash bail. Cuomo. That wasn't even DeBlasio that did it. It was Cuomo, the governor. He ended it in New York, and now the crime rate has gone through the roof. A speaker at Biden's convention, proudly declared, we're talking about abolishing the police. We're talking about abolishing ICE, and we're talking about abolishing prisons. And that's, the only thing they're not abolishing are taxes because your taxes are going to go up at a level that you've never even heard of before.
If you want jobs and you want a lot of police and you want a lack of crime, if you take away New York and Chicago and some of these terrible cities that you see about with the crime, the crime is so bad. I left New York four years ago, and I could see, because he's a terrible mayor, I could see there were things that were happening that were bad. He's no Rudy Giuliani, I can tell you that. But I could see things were happening. But the last six months, seven months, it just exploded. It's incredible. Crime up 368%, 368%. It's crazy. It's crazy.
We've dismantled drug smuggling and human trafficking of—these networks are horrible. The human trafficking in women, which has turned out—you think of it as almost an ancient crime, but it's not. It's bigger now, all over the world, than it's ever been because of the computer, because of the internet. It's bigger now than ever before. It's a horrible thing. Much of it through the southern border. But all over the world, this is taking place, and we've brought it down to levels that nobody thought even possible. But it's a terrible thing. Mostly trafficking in women—children to a lesser extent, but women. We've removed 20,000 gang members, including 4,500 MS-13 members, and we brought them back to their countries. And their countries, under the Obama administration, didn't want to take people. You know that, right? They didn't want to take them. They'd say: "No, don't bring them back here. We're not taking them." Guatemala, El Salvador—right?—Honduras. They wouldn't want to—they wouldn't take people back. Now they take them back. They say, "Oh, thank you very much."

And you look at most cities in our country—you know, crime is actually down. You look at Chicago, and you say, "How is that possible?" You look at New York, what's happened just in a short period of time. But we're with them, and they're with us, and they've done a fantastic job. All right?

If they were allowed to do their job. You'd have no crime in New York. Rudy Giuliani knows that better than anybody. Thank you, Rudy.
We must always have law and order. All federal crimes are being investigated, prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law. When the anarchists started ripping down our statues and monuments, right outside, I signed an order immediately. 10 years in prison, and it was a miracle, it all stopped. No more statues. [laughter]
Last year over 1,000 African-Americans were murdered as a result of violent crime in just four Democrat-run cities. The top 10 most dangerous cities in the country are run by Democrats and have been for many decades. Thousands more African-Americans are victim and victims of violent crime in these communities.
We will continue to reduce taxes and regulations at levels not seen before. We will create 10 million jobs in the next ten months, and it will be higher than that. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, and surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. We will ban deadly sanctuary cities and ensure that federal healthcare is protected for American citizens, not for illegal aliens.
The President. You know what, I used to stand back and I'd say, you know, "Be quiet, please. Don't say that. It's really not nice." You know it's true. She deleted 33- Think of it. They'll never find the emails because they were acid washed, deleted. But you know what? She got a subpoena from the United States Congress, right? And she and her lawyer deleted 33,000 emails after she got a United States subpoena. And you say, "Why isn't she guilty of a major crime?" Right? And then she took her telephones and she smashed them with a hammer. Right? And then she took the other ones, and she deleted them. And now the Mueller scam, these people, the worst people. I have a friend, a very smart guy, very streetwise guy. He said, "You have to be the most honest guy in the world to go through three years of investigations, where they have the worst human beings in the world." They worked for the Democrats. They worked-
We built a convention center with 2,800 beds, and he didn't use the beds for senior citizens. He hardly used the beds at all. He hardly used the ships at all. He said we did a phenomenal job, and now he gets political. He wants to get political with me. A real wise guy, but that's okay. You gotta see what they are doing between him and de Blasio. That's another beauty. What they've done to my beautiful city. I love that city so much. What they've done is so horrible. The highest taxes in the land, crime all over the place. They're, like, 300% up in crime. We need Rudy to come out of retirement. [cheers and applause] But we're defeating the China virus. When Biden was vice president, he was a complete disaster on the swine flu, which was a much easier thing to handle. Joe Biden's own chief of staff said that when Biden managed swine flu in 2009, they, quote, "Did every possible thing wrong." This is the guy that worked for him in charge of the swine flu. And 60 million Americans got H1N1 in a period of time. And it's just purely a for-. . . He said it was just- "We were lucky." He said, "It's just lucky that there weren't great mass casualties." Different kind of a disease, a little bit.
By the way, all of these places were talking about, you know, are Democrat- run, Chicago, New York, Portland, Seattle. The only reason Seattle got settled, because they knew we were going in. We told them, "We're going in tomorrow morning. We're gonna open it up. We're gonna take it." It would have taken us 20 minutes. So they sent people that night, because they didn't wanna be embarrassed. But look at what we've done. And so, every place we've touched, we solved the crime, but they have to ask us. If they don't ask us, we're not supposed to do it, but maybe we do it anyway. [cheers and applause] And it usually takes anywhere from 25 minutes to about one hour.
That's where everyone aspires to, and that includes minorities and everybody. Don't let them ruin the suburbs. [cheers and applause] And with that comes tremendous crime. And you know, I was speaking, I was talking the other day, "Darling, somebody just moved next door." "Who is it?" "It's a representative of Antifa." She will look at her husband, say, "Darling, we're out of here. We're out of here." Antifa. Remember they were trying to blame other people. They don't like to mention the name Antifa. I said it's Antifa and I was right. I was right. They're bad people. And you know what, they have to pay a price for the damage and for the horror that they've caused, they have to pay a price. [cheers and applause] And it's so easy. It's so easy. A lot of them now are wealthy. You know, they're like these wealthy, spoiled kids that have no clue about life.
So, so far he's refused to do it. I'm probably forcing him tonight to do something, but he should put out a list of his judges so that you know where you stand. [cheers and applause] Biden supports cutting police funding, you know that, abolishing- And by the way-[booing]-did you see, we just got, Chicago police today endorsed Trump. That's not easy to do. Chicago. [cheers and applause] New York's finest, New York's finest endorse, Florida, Ohio, Texas. We have everybody. Is there a police officer in the country, if there is, they'll do a commercial. "This officer loves Sleepy Joe Biden, he's so tough on crime." So Biden's been going down very rapidly in the polls. And now what he's doing is he's playing tough guy, that he's tough on crime. All of a sudden, he goes from "demolish," "demolish and defund," okay? But he goes from, "Let's not give the police any money." Let's not even say "defund" for him. His people wanna defund the police. They actually have places, Seattle, they actually don't wanna have police. Minneapolis, they don't wanna have police. They don't wanna have police. What's gonna happen?
But most of these, most of the victims are women, children to a much lesser extent, but women and human traffickers. And you know, what made it that way is the internet. Who would think? It almost sounds like an ancient crime. It's not. It's very modern because of the internet, because of the computer. And it's a horrible thing and we've stopped so much of it. We have an incredible group of people that go after these animals. [cheers and applause]
Never forget that they're coming after me because I am fighting for you, and it's true. [cheers and applause] Over the next four years, to conclude, we will make America into the manufacturing superpower of the world And we will end our reliance on China once and for all. We will make our medical supplies right here in the United States. [cheers and applause] We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring economies, and a record prosperity, even greater than last year. [cheers and applause] We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities, and ban sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause]
Furthermore, the corporations, these poor, stupid people that run the— You know, they got paid a lot of money. They're weak, ineffective people, let's face it. They're funding anti-police organizations and other organizations that are— It's so embarrassing. And I don't mean for a little. Like, they gave 100 million dollars and 250 million. You're talking about serious money. You're talking about serious money, and that money is not used for good reasons. And these stupid corporations— And they'll be the first to go if the radical left ever took— They'd throw those guys out like they were nothing. If they were lucky, they'd just be thrown out. It would probably be a lot rougher than that. These people don't know what they're getting into. But instead of giving money, they should give money to the families of the crime victims and the fallen officers. That's what they should do. [cheers and applause]
Over the next four years, we'll be making America into the manufacturing superpower of the world and we'll end our reliance on China once and for all. We will make our medical supplies right here in the United States. We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring economies, and record prosperity. We will expand Opportunity Zones, and we will continue cutting taxes and regulations at a level that nobody has ever seen before. [cheers and applause] We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. And we'll be watching the ballots very closely also, by the way. [cheers and applause] And we will ban sanctuary cities. We will appoint prosecutors, judges, and justices who believe in enforcing the law, not in enforcing their own agenda. We will ensure equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed. We will defend the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat-run states are not doing nearly as well as the Republican-run states and cities, and especially when it comes to crime. Biden's pledged to—that he wants a net zero carbon emissions, meaning no fracking, no gas-powered cars, skyrocketing energy bills, and abolishing millions of jobs. It'll cost this country millions and millions of jobs and your energy costs will go through the roof.
So, you wouldn't be able to survive a Joe Biden. You wouldn't be able to survive. You know, we've been calling it socialism. I don't think it's socialism. I think it's a step beyond, what they're talking about. You look at Portland, you look at Chicago, you look at New York, you look at Baltimore and Oakland and all— These are Democrat-run cities that are horrible on crime. There's no law and order, no cash bail, no anything. And you know what? The Republican cities are running great. They're running great. So, we're gonna get it all changed around. We went into Minneapolis, we solved the problem like you wouldn't believe. What did it take? You saw it. What did that take? I would say probably 30 minutes. Right? They should have called us in about seven days earlier.
These far-left justices would release violent criminals, shield foreign terrorists, impose sanctuary cities, and declare the death penalty totally unconstitution—hey, it will be totally unconstitutional. They wanna declare it unconstitutional for even the most depraved mass murderers. [booing] And it's a tough thing. It's a tough thing. They came to my office today and the death penalty—for clemency. I said, "What was the crime?" The crime was so horrible that I won't tell you what it was, but it's been going on for 21 years or so. The crime was so horrible that this person committed, that I said, "Look, I just can't talk about it." It was so, it as so horrible. And that's usually the case, usually the case, like the Boston bomber.
Sent young men to fight in endless wars. They just never ended. They're coming back home. You see that. They're coming back home. Many are already back. While our inner cities crumbled at home and made cities less safe and less secure. Joe Biden should not be demanding your support, he should be begging for your forgiveness. He really should be. [shouting] He should be. [shouting] My opponent drafted the 1994 disaster—[shouting]—the 1994 crime bill which caused unfair sentencing disparities that devastated Black families. And I mean just devastated. I have heard more about the 1994 and when we did criminal justice reform, it was largely about erasing that terrible act. That was his, that was his deal. I rolled back the unfair provisions of the 1994 Biden crime bill. And I signed it into groundbreaking criminal justice reform, which people are so happy about. [cheers and applause]
The President. The Democrat party's war on cops has caused Black-owned businesses to be burned and Black homes and churches to be totally destroyed. Most tragically of all, so many innocent Black lives have been cruelly taken from us. People are dying by the thousands in Black-on-Black crime, and I want it to stop. And people aren't talking about it. They're not talking about it. [cheers and applause] They're not talking about it. In Chicago, as an example, there are weekends when 60, 70, or more people are shot. This is shot, and many die. How can we allow this to go on? How can we allow this to happen? But they're all Democrat-run cities. Every year thousands of African Americans are murdered as a result of violent crime. And again, in these Democrat-run monstrosities. The way they run them, it's worse—
Also, Bloomberg—Bloomberg can't go to Florida and pay people to vote. He's paying people to—he committed a crime if he does that. And he has done that. So, you know, he understands that. So that's it.

The Biden plan calls for abolishing cash bail. That's wonderful. You have a murderer. They want to abolish so there're people all over. Look at what happened to New York. They abolished cash bail. Your crime went up like 200%. It's terrible. And it's common sense. It's not like you have to be tough or not tough or—It's common sense. They're gonna release 400,000 criminals onto your streets and into your neighborhoods [booing] if crazy Joe becomes President. It's not even conceivable. No, no, running against him, it's put such pressure, because I'm running against—No, no, running against him, it puts such pressure because I'm running against the worst in the history of presidential. And now if I lose, can you imagine? If I lose, I will have lost to the worst candidate, the worst candidate in the history of presidential politics. If I lose, what do I do? [laughter] I'd rather run against somebody who's extraordinarily talented. At least this way, I can go and lead my life. But we're not gonna lose, we're gonna win. We're gonna win at numbers. [applause] We're gonna win in numbers. Right?
The Democrat party's war on cops is driving police officers to leave their jobs in record numbers. No one is hurt more by the left-wing crusade against law enforcement than African-Americans. They're hurt the most. And you look at it and you know it. Last year, and by the way, large percentages of our policemen and women are African-Americans. It's a Black community. Last year, in just four Democrat-run cities, over 1000 African-Americans were murdered as a result of violent crime. This year, murders in Democrat cities have increased by more than 30%. And we'd help them. We'd help them. We want to help them. We say, "Call." I say, "Call." They don't want to call. More than half of the victims are African-Americans. Joe Biden and the left ignore these American victims. I never will. We're never gonna ignore them. We have done more for the Black community than any President with the exception of Abraham Lincoln. It's true. It's true. [cheers and applause]
This political class has nothing but disdain for you and for your values. They flood your communities with criminal aliens, drugs and crime, while living behind gated compounds in communities. They oppose school choice, so important is school choice, while sending their families to the best private schools. They attack the Second Amendment, while employing armed guards for themselves. They want to get rid of your Second Amendment. It's not gonna happen with me, I tell—I promise. I don't think they'll get Ron Johnson on their side. Ron, can I have your pledge please? I will protect—Okay. We got Ron Johnson. Fellas, we have your votes. In 2016, Wisconsin voted to fire this corrupt and decrepit political establishment. And you elected an outsider as President to finally put America first. That's what you did. [applause] To defend our workers and our national security, I took the toughest ever action to confront China's rampant theft of American jobs.
While the missing truck full of ballots is bad enough, other whistleblowers say they drove thousands of prefilled ballots right over state lines, which is a federal crime. A subcontractor for the Post Office, Nathan Pease, said that he was told by two separate postal workers that the Post Office in Wisconsin had collected and backdated over 100,000 ballots on the morning after the election. Unsurprisingly others also claimed the integrity of Dominion voting machines has been compromised and cannot be trusted.
The President. So, if you just take the crime of what those Democrat workers were doing, and by the way, there was no water main break. You know they said—there was no water main break. That's 10 times more than I need to win this state, 10 times more. It's 10 times maybe more than that, but it's 10 times more because we lost by a very close number. The alleged Biden margin of victory in several states is entirely accounted for by extraordinarily large midnight vote dumps. You saw them with going up to the sky, all extremely skewed to Biden. Like, Biden would get 10,000 votes and Trump would get three in a Trump area. Oh. For, example, at 6:31 AM in Michigan, reported 141,238 votes for Joe Biden and 5,900 votes for Donald Trump. 96% for Biden, 4% for Trump in an area where I should be doing quite well. You know, I won almost every county in Michigan, almost every district, it was—except for one. And they actually had more people, if you look at the ballots, they had ballots all over. They had more ballots than they had people voting. How do you do that? So, they had people, and they're voting, and then as you know, two of the canvassers were very brave. They didn't vote, and they got the hell knocked out of them from the standpoint of what they went through. They took, all the cameras went off and then they raised their hand, but then they couldn't sign it ultimately, but more ballots than they had voters. Now, how simple is that?
Second, again from this very respected political leader, "Second, there is clear evidence that tens of thousands of votes were switched from President Trump to former Vice President Biden in several counties throughout Georgia. For example, in Bibb County," anybody live in Bibb County? Bibb, Bibb, B-I-B-B. "President Trump was reported to have 29,391 votes at 9:11 PM, while simultaneously former Vice President Joe Biden was reported to have 17,218. Minutes later at the next update these vote numbers switched with President Trump now having 17,000. And Biden now having 29,391." [booing] That was a switch of over 12,000 votes. It was like a miracle. Third, "During this hearing, a presenter demonstrated that a Dominion Poll could be hacked into in real time because it was connected to the internet." Now, anything connected to the internet, that's not good. But this demonstration proved that these machines could allow votes to be siphoned off or added during the voting process because they're connected to the internet. Cybersecurity experts agree that voting machines should not be connected to the internet at any time, in any way, shape or form. Did you see that during the hearing? This guy sitting there. Well, can you connect into the machines? Yes. How do you do that? Within about 25 seconds, he controlled the internet. Former Vice President Biden led Georgia by only 11,779 votes. Every one of the things I told you about almost is more votes than what we're talking about. The crime that was committed in this state is immeasurable. An immediate forensic audit of an appropriate sampling of Dominion's voting machines and related equipment is critical to determine the level of illegal fraudulent ballots, improperly counted in Georgia during the 2020 general election and during tomorrow's race. You've gotta be very careful. [cheers and applause]
Decades of progress made in bringing down crime are now being reversed by this Administration's rollback of criminal enforcement.
And when a Secretary of State illegally stores her emails on a private server, deletes 33,000 of them so the authorities can't see her crime, puts our country at risk, lies about it in every different form and faces no consequence – I know that corruption has reached a level like never ever before in our country.
When the FBI Director says that the Secretary of State was "extremely careless" and "negligent," in handling our classified secrets, I also know that these terms are minor compared to what she actually did. They were just used to save her from facing justice for her terrible terrible crimes.
In fact, her single greatest accomplishment may be committing such an egregious crime and getting away with it – especially when others who have done far less, have paid so dearly. When that same Secretary of State rakes in millions and millions of dollars trading access and favors to special interests and foreign powers, I know the time for action has come.
We will bring the same economic success to America that Mike brought to Indiana, which is amazing. He is a man of character and accomplishment. He is the man for the job. The first task for our new Administration will be to liberate our citizens from the crime and terrorism and lawlessness that threatens their communities.
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
We're not here to help ourselves. We're here to devote ourselves to the national good. Public service is a high and great calling. It's our solemn duty, together, to protect the country, our country, this great, great country; to defend its workers and promote the well-being of all Americans. So many people are depending on us and on you as families, you as people that are going to get it done. So many people: the veterans, the unemployed, men and women serving in harm's way overseas, victims of crime, and young Americans looking to fulfill their dreams. So many of those young Americans, and they're going to be fulfilling their dreams. We're going to make it much easier for them.

Our order also does the following: ends the policy of catch-and-release at the border; requires other countries to take back their criminals—they will take them back; cracks down on sanctuary cities; empowers ICE officers to target and remove those who pose a threat to public safety; calls for the hiring of another 5,000 Border Patrol officers; calls for the tripling the number of ICE officers. And you both do an incredible job, but you need help, you need more. Creates an Office in Homeland Security dedicated to supporting the victims of illegal immigrant crime.
Mr. Giuliani. So congratulations. And what you've been doing is keeping your promises, and this is one of your promises. One of your promises was to shore up our country because one of the dangers we face—national security and crime—is cybersecurity. And a large part of our country, unlike other countries, is made up of the private sector. And the private sector is wide open to hacking. And sometimes, by hacking the private sector, you can get into Government.

So here, you're addressing not only a national security problem, but you're addressing the fastest growing form of crime in America, which is cyber theft. It's growing faster than any other crime.

The President: Well, I think it's ridiculous. Sanctuary cities, as you know, I'm very much opposed to sanctuary cities. They breed crime, there's a lot of problems. If we have to, we'll defund. We give tremendous amounts of money to California — California in many ways is out of control, as you know. Obviously the voters agree, otherwise they wouldn't have voted for me.

We're committed to securing our borders to reduce crime, illegal drugs, human trafficking, especially in border counties. We have a lot of the border counties represented.
So we're going to be very tough on crime. So we're going to be very tough on the drugs pouring in, and that's a big part of the crime. We're going to be very strong at the border. We have no choice. And we're going to be building a wall. We're starting very soon. General Kelly will be working with a lot of you. And he's fantastic. He was the one who got approved very quickly along with General Mattis. He's very, very outstanding. And I very much appreciate that you're here today.
Laramie County, WY, Sheriff Danny L. Glick. Mr. President, thank you. It's such an honor to be here. I'm Danny Glick, sheriff of Laramie County, Wyoming. You know, there are so many issues that you'll hear going around this table. One of the ones that probably isn't—that people don't realize is EPA decisions that have affected our coal industry, our oil industry in the West. But beyond that, it increases the number of people that are jobless and thus increases our crime statistics. And it's starting to overwhelm us. We're very small out there for the most part, and we don't have the numbers of deputies, officers, and law enforcement that can sometimes keep up with this. I appreciate what you've done and what you're planning in the future. I think it was very well publicized, and I just appreciate being here today.
The President. How much of your crime is caused, do you think, by drugs generally?
Acting Attorney General Boente. I am aware of that, Mr. President. And we have gotten a great deal of criticism for the asset forfeiture, which, as the sheriff said, frequently was taking narcotics proceeds and other proceeds of crime. But there has been a lot of pressure on the Department to curtail some of that. The President. So what do you do? So, in other words, they have a huge stash of drugs. So in the old days, you take it. Now we're criticized if we take it. So who gets it? What happens to it? You tell them to keep it? [Laughter]
We're going to go into the Oval Office. Does anybody have anything to—not even a question, a statement, as to how we can bring about law enforcement in a very good, civil, lovely way, but we have to stop crime—right? Would anybody like to make a statement?
We must work with them, not against them. They're working against you. For many years, they've been working against you. We must support them, not undermine them. And instead of division and disunity—and which is so much disunity—we must build bridges of partnership and of trust. Those who demonize law enforcement or who use the actions of a few to discredit the service of many are hurting the very people they say that they want to help. When policing is reduced, crime is increased, and our poorest citizens suffer the most. And I see it all the time. When the number of police goes down, crime goes up.

He's a man of integrity, a man of principle, and a man of total, utter resolve. You just got a little witnessing of that. That resolve is what we need right now. America faces many challenges. We face the menace of rising crime and the threat of deadly terror. And it's not getting better, but it will get better very soon. It's going to get a lot better.

He will be a great protector of the people. I'm signing three executive actions today designed to restore safety in America. These executive actions continue to deliver on my campaign promises. First, I'm directing Department of Justice and Homeland Security to undertake all necessary and lawful action to break the back of the criminal cartels that have spread across our Nation and are destroying the blood of our youth and other people, many other people. Secondly, I'm directing the Department of Justice to form a Task Force on reducing violent crime in America. And thirdly, I'm directing the Department of Justice to implement a plan to stop crime and crimes of violence against law enforcement officers. It's a shame what's been happening to our great, truly great law enforcement officers. That's going to stop as of today.

There are a lot of things we need to do. First, we need to value and support and encourage the fabulous people who work there. I've worked with them over the years. I know how good they are, and their talents need to be directed at this Nation's benefit in a lot of different ways. We have a crime problem. I wish the blip—I wish the rise that we are seeing in crime in America today were some sort of aberration or a blip. I—my best judgment, having been involved in criminal law enforcement for many years is that this is a dangerous, permanent trend that places the health and safety of the American people at risk. We will deploy the talents and abilities of the Department of Justice in the most effective way possible to confront this rise in crime and to protect the people of our country.

We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing Federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation—take a look at Chicago and others—taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug-infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars, and we're not going to let it happen any longer.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
So I've directed the Department of Justice to take a firm, firm stance to protect our cops, sheriffs and police from crimes of violence against them. We will work with our police, not against our police. Our police do a great job, and they've never been troubled like they're troubled now. It's very unfair what's happening. So we want to cherish our law enforcement, and we will always protect those who protect us.

We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including our inner cities. We're going to make our inner cities safe again. Look at what's going on. Look at what's happening in Chicago: hundreds of shootings, hundreds of deaths. I'll tell you, what's happening in Chicago and many other places. Safety is a civil right, and we will fight to make America totally safe again. I've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy transnational criminal cartels, which are all over the United States, and we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into your country, into your community, into your cities, and poisoning our youth. We're stopping it. We're stopping it.

My budget increases spending, and the increase in all spending for Federal law enforcement also. And activities having to do with law enforcement will be substantially increased. And we will fight violent crime. You look at what's happening in our cities, you look at what's happening in Chicago—what's going on in Chicago? We will fight violent crime, and we will win. And we'll win that one fairly quickly. Once we give the local police, the local law enforcement the right to go in and fight it, and we back them monetarily and also otherwise—and we're going to win that one. We're going to win it fairly quickly, I believe.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The office is called VOICE: Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement. We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and silenced by special interests. Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose Government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.

We are going to drain the swamp of government corruption in Washington, D.C., and we are going to keep our promises -- all of the promises that we made. We are going to massively reduce your taxes. (Applause.) We are going to reduce very substantially rising crime, and support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.)

Sadly, our police are often prevented from doing their jobs. When policing is reduced, the main victims are the most vulnerable citizens of our society, and you see that all over. In too many of our communities, violent crime is on the rise, and in too many places, our citizens have not been safe for a very, very long time.

Our Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, is working very hard on this problem. It takes a lot of his time, because this causes so much of the crime that you——

The President: I don't know yet. People want the border wall. My base definitely wants the border wall, my base really wants it — you've been to many of the rallies. OK, the thing they want more than anything is the wall. My base, which is a big base; I think my base is 45 percent. You know, it's funny. The Democrats, they have a big advantage in the electoral college. Big, big, big advantage. I've always said the popular vote would be a lot easier than the electoral college. The electoral college — but it's a whole different campaign [unintelligible]. The electoral college is very difficult for a Republican to win, and I will tell you, the people want to see it. They want to see the wall, they want to see security. Now, it just came out that they're 73 percent down. ... That's a tremendous achievement. ... Look at this, in 100 days, that down to the lowest in 17 years and it's going lower. Now, people aren't coming because they know they're not going to get through, and there isn't crime. You know the migration up to the border is horrible for women, you know that? [nintelligible] Now, much of that's stopped because they can't get through.

Defending the rule of law is a priority, not just in the courts, but also on the streets and on the border. We've told the incredible police of our Nation that they have our full support as they work to bring down violent crime rates. We've taken bold action to go after criminal cartels and made it a top priority to prosecute anyone who targets law enforcement. This has been the work of my administration: fighting for the American worker, defending the rule of law, and returning the power to the American people. Since my Inauguration, economic confidence has soared, reaching higher than any time in 9 years. Optimism among manufacturers is at a record high. And small-business confidence has seen its largest increase in nearly four decades.

As members of the NRA know well, some of the most important decisions a President can make are appointments, and I've appointed people who believe in law, order, and justice. That is why I have selected as your Attorney General, number one, a really fine person, a really good man, a man who has spent his entire career fighting crime, supporting the police, and defending the Second Amendment. For the first time in a long time, you now have a pro-Second Amendment, tough-on-crime Attorney General, and his name is Jeff Sessions.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The President. We'll build the wall, folks. Don't even worry about it. Go to sleep. Go home, go to sleep. Rest assured. That's the final thing—we need it. We need it. And if the Democrats knew what the hell they were doing, they'd approve it so easy, because we want to stop crime in our country. Obviously, they don't mind illegals coming in. They don't mind drugs pouring in. They don't mind——

Audience members. Boo! The President. I've known him a long time. Senator Schumer is a bad leader, not a natural leader at all. He works hard to study leadership. When you have to study leadership, you've got problems. [Laughter] And his policies are hurting innocent Americans and making it easier for drug dealers to enter our country. Schumer is weak on crime and wants to raise your taxes through the roof.

In this effort to restore safety to our country, we are going to strongly support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. I just signed an Executive order directing Attorney General Jeff Sessions to combat crimes of violence against our police, and the Department of Justice is now prioritizing the prosecution of criminals who attack officers of the law.

No one asked these selfless men and women to enlist in this righteous cause or to enroll as foot soldiers in the eternal struggle against crime and violence. They joined the cause because their hearts were big and full of amazing courage. They joined because they cared so deeply for the innocent and helpless and forgotten. They put on the uniform because they believed to the very core of their souls, that it was their mission in life to serve and to protect.

Now, as President, my highest duty is to keep America safe. We will keep America safe. And included in safe means safe from crimes, safe from terrorism, and safe from all enemies, foreign and domestic. At the center of that duty is the requirement to ensure that our law enforcement personnel are given the tools and resources they need to do their jobs and to come home to their families safely.

Freedom includes the right to be free—and I mean totally free—from crime and from violence. MS-13 is going to be gone from our streets very soon, believe me. It's these two guys.

When policing is reduced, it's often the poorest and most vulnerable Americans who are the first to suffer. We have all seen the tragic rise in violence and crimes in many of our disadvantaged communities. We've seen the unbearable horror of the shortcomings in Baltimore and Chicago that have cut short so many lives and so many beautiful, beautiful dreams.

President Santos and I had a very productive meeting, and we will continue to work very closely together to bring peace, safety, and prosperity to the hemisphere. Perhaps no area is really more important in terms of cooperation than our joint effort to end the terrible drug crimes that plague both of our countries.

The United States and Colombia, they're both democracies of greater—of longer standing in the hemisphere, we have supported each other. Our soldiers fought shoulder to shoulder in the Korean war. At the request of the United States, we sent antidrug experts to Afghanistan. And today, Colombia and the United States are working together to support Central America in their fight against drug cartels and the violence of organized crime.

Such as we said today, we are working with your administration to take advantage of the unique opportunity peace offers so as to reduce permanently the production of coca leaf in Colombia and fight more effectively the other links in drug trafficking, including consumption. We must continue and deepen the fight against organized crime, transnational crime responsible not just for drug trafficking, but also for human trafficking and illegal mining.

Mr. Baker. For you—yes, sir, Mr. President. My question is, as someone who led a nation that's really done a lot of rebuilding and had to rebound from an epidemic of crime and drugs over quite a many years, what do you make of Mr. Trump's America first policy? And further, you've had a tough time with conservative radio, sometimes been called a punching bag. And you've said you have to persevere. I'm curious if you've given any advice to President Trump on how to do so.

It was history's darkest hour. Millions of innocent, wonderful, and beautiful lives—men, women, and children—were extinguished as part of a systematic attempt to eliminate the Jewish people. It was the most savage crime against God and his children. And it is our solemn duty to remember, to mourn, to grieve, and to honor every single life that was so cruelly and viciously taken.

Attorney General Jefferson B. Sessions III. Mr. President, it's great to be here and celebrate this group. We are receiving, as you know—I'm not sure the rest of you fully understand—the support with law enforcement all over America. They have been very frustrated. They are so thrilled that we have a new idea that we're going to support them and work together to properly, lawfully fight the rising crime that we're seeing.

As you all know, shortly after 7 a.m. this morning, a gunman opened fire on Members of Congress and their staffs as they were practicing for tomorrow's annual charity baseball game. Authorities are continuing to investigate the crime, and the assailant has now died from his injuries. The FBI is leading the investigation and will continue to provide updates as new information becomes available.

We pray for all of the victims of this terrible crime who are still recovering, including Zachary Barth and Matt Mika, both of whom are respected and cherished by so many.

In that terrible crime, we also witnessed the incredible heroism of Capitol Police. Special Agent Crystal Griner—who I also had the honor of meeting during my visit to the Hospital—raced into gunfire, along with Special Agent David Bailey. They saved the lives of our Members of Congress and prevented that dark day from becoming a tragedy beyond imagination. They, like so many other courageous police officers, represent the very best of us. We salute them, and we also salute members of Alexandria Police, Fire, and Rescue.

And I'll tell you what, Karen is going to be really incredible. She is going to be joining some wonderful people and doing some wonderful work, including major, major tax cuts and health care and lots of things. Going to be reducing crime, and we're securing that Second Amendment. I told you about that. And that looks like it's in good shape with Judge Gorsuch. That looks like it's in good shape.

You're the first group I've told that to. A solar wall. Makes sense. Let's see. We're working it out. We'll see. Solar wall—panels. Beautiful. I mean, actually, think of it, the higher it goes, the more valuable it is. It's like—[laughter]. Pretty good imagination, right? Good? My idea. So we have a good shot. That's one of the places that solar really does work. The tremendous sun and heat. It really does work there. So we'll see what happens with that. That would be great. And I think we could make it look beautiful too. It would really look beautiful. So that would be nice. We're also working night and day to restore law and order to our country. Law and order. You know that. We're reversing the last administration's soft-on-crime policies that helped enable a tragic rise in violent crime. You see what's happening. Look at Chicago. What the hell is going on in Chicago? [Laughter] What's that all about?

President Peña Nieto. Thank you very much. I want to thank you for opening this space that I had with President Donald Trump. And I'm sure this is going to help us continue a very flowing dialogue, sir, that will allow us, of course, for the negotiation of NAFTA; to continue working in terms of cooperation, especially for security, for the security of both nations, especially in our borders; and of course, also working in migration issues, which is a task that both of our nations are occupied, and our administrations are occupied with this issue as well. And of course, something that both of our administrations have taken upon ourselves to really admit, that is, in a coresponsible manner, to look into organized crime issues.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

It's essential that Congress fund hundreds more Federal immigration judges and prosecutors—and we need them quickly, quickly—if we're going to dismantle these deadly networks. And I have to tell you, you know, the laws are so horrendously stacked against us, because for years and years they've been made to protect the criminal. Totally made to protect the criminal, not the officers. You do something wrong, you're in more jeopardy than they are. These laws are stacked against you. We're changing those laws. But in the meantime, we need judges for the simplest thing, things that you should be able to do without a judge. But we have to have those judges quickly. In the meantime, we're trying to change the laws. We're also working with Chairman Bob Goodlatte on a series of enforcement measures—and he's a terrific guy—to keep our country safe from crime and terrorism and in particular, radical Islamic terrorism. A term never uttered by past administration. Never uttered. Did anybody ever hear that term? I don't think so. But you heard it from me.

We're also keeping our country safe from criminal gangs and violent crime. We are taking the fight to the drug smugglers, human traffickers, and the vile criminal cartels like MS-13 who are being thrown out of our country so quickly you can't even count.

The President. But you know, they all said, Mr. President, your speech was so good last night, please, please, Mr. President, don't mention any names. [Laughter] So I won't. I won't. No, I won't vote—one vote away. I will not mention any names. [Laughter] Very Presidential, isn't it? Very Presidential. And nobody wants me to talk about your other Senator, who's weak on borders, weak on crime. So I won't talk about him.

We do not need to limit the potential of our children by trapping them in failing government schools. Every child should have the chance to explore their talents, pursue their passions, and know the joy of achieving their ambitions. And we will never tolerate crime in our cities, bloodshed in our communities, or acts of hatred or terrorism against our citizens. We will not stand for it.

And if you look at, as an example, President Clinton pardoned Marc Rich, who was charged with crimes going back decades, including illegally buying oil from Iran while it held 53 American hostages—wasn't allowed to do that—selling to the enemies of the United States. He was pardoned after his wife donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Clintons.

But no, Mexico will pay for the wall. It may be through a reimbursement. We need the wall very badly. As you know, Mexico has a tremendous crime problem—tremendous—one of the number two or three in the world. And that's another reason we need it. And the—just to add on, tremendous drugs are pouring into the United States at levels that nobody has ever seen before. This happened over the last 3 to 4 years in particular. The wall will stop much of the drugs from pouring into this country and poisoning our youth.

The people of Texas and Louisiana were hit very hard by a historic flood. In their response, they have taught us all a lesson, a very, very powerful lesson: There was no outbreak in crime. There was an outbreak of compassion only: real, beautiful, strong compassion. And they've really inspired us as a nation. To be honest, they've inspired the world, because the world is watching.
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson. Well, Mr. President, let me just add, first, my welcome to all of you to the dinner as well with the President. And these are all very important countries to the United States relationship in the Western Hemisphere economically, but also from a security standpoint. We have many, many shared issues to fight against crime, fight against corruption, narcotics trade, and all of you are very important in the cooperation that we receive in working together toward these shared goals.

But he is going to be great, because he's tough on crime, he's tough on borders. Don't worry. Don't even think about it.
When you look at what's going on in Mexico, Mexico is having a tough time right now in terms of crime. More than ever, we need the wall. We have drugs pouring through on the southern border; they're literally pouring through. And we have to have the wall; we're going to have the wall. But if you look at just what's happening on the other side of the border with the tremendous crime and the tremendous problems going on—we have a very good relationship with Mexico, but there are a lot of problems, and we don't want the drugs, and we don't want the crime, but we need the wall.

Finally, we must adopt the most commonsense solution of all: to prevent our citizens from becoming addicted to drugs in the first place. We must and are focusing so much of our effort on drug demand reduction. We must confront the culture of drug abuse head-on to reduce demand for dangerous narcotics. Every person who buys illicit drugs here in America should know that they are risking their futures, their families, and even their lives. And every American should know that if they purchase illegal drugs, they are helping to finance some of the most violent, cruel, and ruthless organizations anywhere in the world. Illegal drug use is not a victimless crime. There is nothing admirable, positive, or socially desirable about it. There is nothing desirable about drugs. They're bad.
My administration will provide its full support to the great State of Texas and all local authorities investigating this horrible crime. I've spoken just a few minutes ago with Governor Abbott, and we offer our thanks to the first responders, the FBI, all of the many people involved, both Federal and otherwise. Ultimately, they stopped the suspect and rendered immediate lifesaving aid to certain victims of the shooting.

The horror of life in North Korea is so complete that citizens pay bribes to Government officials to have themselves exported aboard as slaves. They would rather be slaves than live in North Korea. To attempt to flee is a crime punishable by death. One person who escaped remarked: "When I think about it now, I was not a human being. I was more like an animal. Only after leaving North Korea did I realize what life was supposed to be."

Considering the misery wrought by the North Korean dictatorship, it is no surprise that it has been forced to take increasingly desperate measures to prevent its people from understanding this brutal contrast. Because the regime fears the truth above all else, it forbids virtually all contact with the outside world. Not just my speech today, but even the most commonplace facts of South Korean life are forbidden knowledge to the North Korean people. Western and South Korean music is banned. Possession of foreign media is a crime punishable by death. Citizens spy on fellow citizens, their homes are subject to search at any time, and their every action is subject to surveillance. In place of a vibrant society, the people of North Korea are bombarded by state propaganda practically every waking hour of the day.

North Korea is not the paradise your grandfather envisioned. It is a hell that no person deserves. Yet, despite every crime you have committed against God and man, you are ready to offer, and we will do that—we will offer a path to a much better future. It begins with an end to the aggression of your regime, a stop to your development of ballistic missiles, and complete, verifiable, and total denuclearization.

The President. Yes, I'll be talking about him. I can tell you one thing for sure: We don't need a liberal person in there, a Democrat—Jones. I've looked at his record. It's terrible on crime. It's terrible on the border. It's terrible on the military. I can tell you for a fact, we do not need somebody that's going to be bad on crime, bad on borders, bad with the military, bad for the Second Amendment.

The President. I'll be letting you know next week. But I can tell you, you don't need somebody who's soft on crime, like Jones.

With that being said, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi did not show up for our meeting today. I'm not really that surprised. We have a lot of differences. They're weak on crime; they're weak on illegal immigration. They want the illegal folks to come pouring into our border, and a lot of problems are being caused, although we've stopped it to a large extent, as much as you can without the wall, which we're going to get.

The President. Well, we are very far apart because our views on crime and our views on immigration and the military, so many are different. But a lot of things have happened, even over the last 2 hours with respect to the missile launch. We want our military funded, and we want it funded now. It's going to be bigger, better, stronger—it already is—than ever before. But we want to get going on that now. So that is a difference, in all fairness, from this morning when I told them that we're way, way far away.

The President. Well, if that happens, I would absolutely blame the Democrats. If it happens, it's going to be over illegals pouring into the country, crime pouring into the country, no border wall, which everybody wants. I got elected partially because of the border wall.

The President. I think he's going to do very well. We don't want to have a liberal Democrat in Alabama, believe me. We want strong borders, we want stopping crime. We want to have the things that we represent, and we certainly don't want to have a liberal Democrat that's controlled by Nancy Pelosi and controlled by Chuck Schumer. We don't want to have that for Alabama.

The President. It could happen. The Democrats are really looking at something that is very dangerous for our country. They are looking at shutting down. They want to have illegal immigrants; in many cases, people that we don't want in our country. They want to have illegal immigrants pouring into our country, bringing with them crime, tremendous amounts of crime. We don't want to have that. We want to have a great, beautiful crime-free country. And we want people coming into our country, but we want them to come on our basis. And that's why we're being so careful with our process and our screening.

So the Democrats maybe will want to shut down the country because they want people flowing into our country. And I want people coming into our country, but I want to vet those people, and I want to vet them very carefully. Because we don't want to have radical Islamic terrorism in this country, and we don't want to have crime in this country. If you look at what just happened in San Francisco, that was a disgrace. And as you know, the Federal Government just got involved and did a great thing, because they're going to take that at least to the next step. They did a great thing by getting involved.

Democrats in Congress want open borders, higher taxes, and Government-run health care that doesn't work—costs a fortune, doesn't work. They're soft on crime, and they want to suffocate our economy with socialist-style regulation, raise your taxes through the sky. They don't want to vote for our tax cuts because they want the exact—they want tax increases. That's why we need a Republican in the House. We need a Republican in the Senate. We need more of them.

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

It's not a news story when our officers save a life, rescue a family, or stop a crime. It's just another day on the job. Yet, no matter the circumstances, you serve tirelessly, selflessly, and heroically. You do it because you really believe in doing your duty and doing it properly.
In the last 2 years, America has seen a tragic rise in violent crime. In 2015 and 2016, we witnessed the steepest 2-year consecutive increase in murders in nearly half a century. And you look at what's going on in Chicago. What the hell is going on in Chicago? [Laughter] What the hell is happening there? [Laughter] For the second year in a row, a person was shot in Chicago every 3 hours. You don't think these people in this room can stop that? They'd stop that. They'd stop it. And just north of our Nation's Capital, in Baltimore, on average, someone was murdered nearly every day of this year.
If we want to bring down violent crime, then we must stand up for our police. All of us gathered here today share a common goal. We want every child to be able to walk safely home from school, and we want every mother and father to know their children will be secure when they tuck them in at night.
We need a physical border wall. We're going to have a wall—remember that—we're going to have a wall to keep out deadly drug dealers, dangerous traffickers, and violent criminal cartels. Mexico is having a tremendous problem with crime, and we want to keep it out of our country.

The President. Yes. Just so you understand—just so you understand, there's been no collusion; there's been no crime. And in theory, everybody tells me I'm not under investigation. Maybe Hillary is, I don't know, but I'm not.

But there's been no collusion. There's been no crime. But we have been very open. We could have done it two ways. We could have been very closed, and it would have taken years. But you know, it's sort of like, when you've done nothing wrong, let's be open and get it over with.

The President: Well allow—let me—[inaudible]. So, they make up a crime, and the crime doesn't exist. And then they say obstruction. And how could there be obstruction on firing Comey? When the man who's in charge of it wrote a letter that was far stronger than anything I would have written. He was in charge—Deputy Rosenstein. He wrote a letter that's far stronger than even what I say.

So there's no—you have a no-crime that was created, you have a phony crime and then they talk about obstruction. And how can they talk about obstruction when I was the most open person, in history, in terms of—there's never been a paper we didn't give them, there's never been a question we didn't answer.

The President: Of course there was no obstruction—excuse me. Of course there was no obstruction. But there was no crime. So now they're saying, could there be—now, I haven't even heard that they're looking at obstruct—I don't know that they're looking at obstruction.

We support our law enforcement partners, and we're working to reduce crime and put dangerous offenders behind bars. At the same time, we want to ensure that those who enter the justice system are able to contribute to their communities after they leave prison, which is one of many very difficult subjects we're discussing, having to do with our great country.

The vast majority of incarcerated individuals will be released at some point and often struggle to become self-sufficient once they exit the correctional system. We have a great interest in helping them turn their lives around, get a second chance, and make our community safe. Many prisoners end up returning to crime, and they end up returning to prison. Two-thirds of the 650,000 people released from prison each year are arrested again within 3 years.

We can help break this vicious cycle through job training—very important, job training—mentoring, and drug addiction treatment. And you know how we're focused on drugs pouring into our country and drug addiction. It's a big problem, even as we speak of this subject. We'll be very tough on crime, but we will provide a ladder of opportunity to the future.

Ms. Rollins. So, in Texas, we changed our laws, we've shut 8 prisons down, we've decreased our incarceration rate by 20 percent, but the most important part of all of that is, our crime rate is down 31 percent in the State of Texas since we undertook all of these reforms.

And by the way, the court — it wasn't me. The courts were not upholding that executive order. You have to do it through Congress. I want to solve the DACA problem. I will consider that a great achievement to solve the DACA problem. It's been out there for a long time. These are good people, these are people that should be able to stay in this country. We're going to solve the DACA problem. But we also want to solve a tremendous problem on the southern border, which is crime. We need a wall, we need the drugs to stop flowing in. They are coming in like — well, they're coming in less now than they were because we have a very strong — we have great Border Patrol agents, great ICE — we have great people and they are really doing a good job. And you see what's happening at the border, it's much better.

The President. Because you go down to any law enforcement agency, you go down to the precincts, and you say, what percentage of your crime is drug related? And it's usually numbers like 70, 75, 80 percent. It's just a massive number.

Acting Director Homan. And two final points, sir. The last thing I'll say about these noncooperative jurisdictions: They, again, entice illegal entry. If they do not think that alien-smuggling organizations in Central America and Mexico are not using sanctuary cities as a selling point—they're saying, "Look, we can get you to San Francisco for this much money, and we'll get you to one of these places where you can even get arrested for committing a crime, and they're not going to help ICE take you into custody."

The President. Different ones or the same? Acting Assistant Attorney General Cronan. We—well, we haven't gotten to the point where they've come back yet—probably yet, sir—but I can give you one good example. We had a takedown a few months ago, Operation Raging Bull—there were 214 MS-13 arrests in the United States; 198 of them were foreign nationals. Of that, only 5 had legal status in the United States. And of the 193, 64 of them had illegally crossed the border as unaccompanied children. Most of whom were then, now, adults by the time they committed the crime.

Now, the Department of Justice—the Attorney General—is dedicating resources to this. He has announced the surging of hundreds of new U.S. attorneys to specifically focus on violent crimes in immigration. He has sent additional prosecutors to our southwest border. They were down there on detail to focus on an emphasis on enforcing immigration and criminal laws.

Today, if you catch somebody, they don't know what to do with them. He hasn't committed the crime, but he may very well. And there's no mental institution, there's no place to bring them. And we have that a lot. Even if they caught this person—I'm being nice when I use the word person—they probably wouldn't have known what to do. They're not going to put them in jail. And yet—so there's none of that middle ground of having that institution where you had trained people that could handle it and do something about it and find out how sick he really is. Because he is a sick guy. And he should have been nabbed a number of times, frankly.

As I said last week, we must work together to create a culture of our country that cherishes life and forces real human connections. We're also working to reduce violent crime in America and to make our communities places that can be totally safe for our children, for our families.
We're getting no help from the State of California. I mean, frankly, if I wanted to pull our people from California, you would have a crime nest like you've never seen in California. All I'd have to do is say, ICE and Border Patrol, let California alone. You'd be inundated—you would see crime like nobody has ever seen crime in this country. And yet we get no help from the State of California. They are doing a lousy management job. They have the highest taxes in the Nation, and they don't know what's happening out there.
And one last point. To the extent that this is about guns, let it be about the illicit use of guns used inappropriately or in crimes so that we can do what we do in Indiana and that we need to work on continually, is to enhance the penalties for any type of offense that's used with a firearm. Let's double down on that. If you commit a burglary or robbery with a firearm, you need to pay a severe consequence.
Reducing violent crime in America is a top priority for my administration, and we will do whatever it takes to get it done. No talk. We're going to do what it takes to get it done.

In 2017, our brave ICE officers arrested more than 100,000 criminal aliens who have committed tens of thousands of crimes. And believe me, these are great people. They cannot—the laws are just against us. They're against—they're against safety. They don't make sense. And you meet with Democrats, and they're always fighting for the criminal. They're not fighting for law-abiding citizens. They're always fighting for the criminal. Doesn't make sense.

The President. Here are just some of the criminal charges and convictions for the aliens arrested by ICE: 11,000 charges or convictions for sex crimes; 48,000 for assault; 13,000 for burglary; and 1,800 for killing people.

But lately it bothers me, I have to tell you. He's showing a particularly keen interest in the news these days. He starts out each morning asking everyone, "Has he been impeached yet?" [Laughter] I don't like that. Mike, you can't be impeached when there is no crime. Please remember that. [Laughter] Put that down. I thought that was going to get a much better—you know. [Laughter]

And we, of course -- we also have problems with crime, organized crime, in Sweden -- shootings. But it's not like you have these no-go zones. We have dealt with it. I'm dealing with it every day, allocating more resources to the police, more policemen trained, more resources to the security police, tougher law on crime, tougher law on terrorism, supporting terrorism. So we do a lot to combat that.
And we can also see some results now in our three major cities -- decreased shootings -- because we're attacking the organized crime very tough. And we'll keep on doing that because there is no space in Sweden for organized crime because they decrease freedom for ordinary people.
But it's not enough to secure only our schools. We must secure the communities where our kids are growing, and wherever they go we have to secure—and wherever anybody goes; not just the kids. And that's why we're committed to reducing violent crime like, I think, no other administration.

The State of California is sheltering dangerous criminals in a brazen and lawless attack on our constitutional system of government. Every State in our Union is subject to the laws and Constitution of the United States, including California. Yet California's leaders are in open defiance of Federal law. They don't care about crime. They don't care about death and killings. They don't care about robberies. They don't care about the kind of things that you and I care about.

Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
But the border wall is truly our first line of defense, and it's probably, if you think about it, our first and last, other than the great ICE agents and other people—moving people out. It will save thousands and thousands of lives, save taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars by reducing crime, drug flow, welfare fraud, and burdens on schools and hospitals. The wall will save hundreds of billions of dollars—many, many times what it's going to cost.

To underscore the scope of that threat we face, last year alone, ICE arrested illegal immigrants with 48,000 charges or convictions for assault; 11,000 for sex crimes; 1,800 for killing people and other homicide-related offensive. And we have offenses that are so great we're not even going to talk about them right now. They are so great.

It's just—it's a common thing, and I—you know, some thoughts have come over my—in my head the last few days. This is actually a mass murder happening in the United States by illegal aliens killing American citizens. Over 63,000 Americans have been killed since 9/11 by illegal aliens. It's a crime spree that is being left unchecked, and these sanctuary city officials—State and city officials—they're putting American lives into harm every single day. And we have become collateral damage to their personal agendas, and it's got to be stopped.

These days, there's no such thing as a Blue Dog Democrat, a red State Democrat, or a conservative Democrat because they are all Pelosi Democrats: weak on crime, weak on terrorism, and weak on national defense.
Democrats like to campaign as moderates, but they always govern like radicals. That is why I am going to campaign all across this country to elect Republicans so that we can reduce taxes further, reduce crime, increase jobs, and make our communities safe and prosperous and secure. And I'll be all over the country. Kevin, you'll get me all over. Where is our Kevin? You're going to get me all over the country, Kevin. [Laughter] And I'll be complaining every single trip. [Laughter] But I'm going to get there.
You know, certain communities, believe it or not, like in San Diego, they want a wall. Nobody likes to talk about that. In fact, I said, "Don't build a wall there." They're all wanting it. And Jerry Brown, who's doing a terrible job as Governor, but you know. [Laughter] No, if you like high taxes and lots of other—and crime—[laughter]—that's your guy. [Laughter] But they go, and they talk so much about the wall. But in San Diego, as you know, there's a long stretch that is demanding the wall. So I said, okay—they were ready to start. I said: "Don't build it. We'll wait until we get everything approved." Because they're having a lot of pressure. They want the wall.

Frankly, if we have had more Republican votes, we wouldn't have had to give away what we gave away, which many of the people in this room, including me, don't like. Because it was a waste, in many cases. But the Democrats want things. They don't want to focus on crime and borders and people pouring into our country, many of whom are not the people we want to come in. We want a merit-based immigration system. We want people to come in on merit, not based on a lottery; you pick a ticket.

It's amazing what this is going to do to give prosecutors, the Department of Justice, State and local district attorneys the ability to go after and shut down these websites, put people behind bars, give victims the justice they deserve, and to actually go to the heart of the Communications Decency Act and make sure that the courts know, that the public knows, that survivors know that it was never Congress's intention, through CDA, to make a red light district out of the internet. If it's a crime offline, it's a crime online. And we are grateful to your leadership, Mr. President, and to Ivanka——
In this age of international crime, smuggling, terrorism, and trafficking, it is also essential that we have strong border security and immigration control. This is fundamental to national defense.

So by doing that the Democrats don't care about our military. They don't--they don't care and they don't care about our borders , and I don't think they care much about crime because if you look at it MS-13--they pour through--everybody pours through, and they want it. They want it.
The one good thing: watch the caravan watch how sad and--and terrible it is. Including for those people because they come up and the crime that they inflict on themselves and that others inflict on them. It's a horrible dangerous journey for them. For them. And they come up because they know once they get here they can walk right into our country. We have the greatest people on earth and they can't do anything because the laws are corrupt. The laws are corrupt. So we have fought to secure our border but Democrats in Congress: Nancy Pelosi, Schumer. [booing]
You remember, I'd come into big rooms, big audiences, and I'd say, what do you have to lose? Because the Democrats have always had that vote. I said, what do you have to lose? Horrible on crime. Horrible on education. Horrible on everything. I say, what do you have to lose? And they voted for me, and we won. But now the numbers are much higher than they ever were with African American—but we're happy.

As we secure out borders, we're also supporting the heroes who fight crime, serve our citizens, and secure our streets: our brave men and brave women in blue. We love them. In my administration, we have a simple policy: We will protect those who protect us. You saw what I did with the military equipment, the excess equipment that was sitting all over the country in warehouses, never to be used again. And other administrations, they just didn't want to give it to the police. They said: "It's too much protection. It looks too strong. It looks like military." Guess what? It's now being distributed all over to our police forces. And it's better than they could ever buy. Can't buy stuff like that.

Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
Actually I, sort of, changed my mind after we started. I called my people, I said, "How much would it cost to stop building the wall in San Diego so they go out and advocate for us because they're desperate for their wall. Because they don't like people running over their front yards and all of the problems, including by the way massive amounts of crime?" I said, "How much would it cost to stop"—I'm in the construction business it's what I do best.
If we want to bring down violent crime, then we must stand up for our police. We must confront and condemn dangerous antipolice prejudice. Can you believe there's prejudice with respect to our police? We're not going to let bad things happen to our police. So we must show appreciation, gratitude, and respect for those who police our streets and patrol our communities.

One of the most alarming crimes taking place against our police are ambush attacks. Think of that—ambush attacks. I have directed the Justice Department to do everything in its power to defend the lives of American law enforcement.

In our city, more immigrant people report crime. And this narrative that sanctuary city will allow more immigrants to report crime is fake news, Mr. President.
Because of the legalization of marijuana in California, now we're seeing those same individuals working with other criminal groups: the Asian groups, the Russian groups, the motorcycle groups, all kinds of organized crime. It's bringing into rural California——
When we joined the amicus brief, it was—we recognized that—myself and my councilmembers—was that Federal law reigns over immigration, not the State. What is happening—in listening around this table of what's happening in other communities, I haven't had anything personal from the ICE of illegal immigrations yet, but I know it's coming, because we can't enforce anything. The crime rate is up in California, and it's going to continue to rise as long as these policies——
The President. And we have—the crime rate in the Nation is way down. But in California, it's up. Because of the ridiculous laws. Go ahead.
Prison reform is an issue that unites people from across the political spectrum. It's an amazing thing. Our whole nation benefits if former inmates are able to reenter society as productive, law-abiding citizens. Every year, over 620,000 inmates—primarily from State prisons—are released after completing their sentences. For many, really, life outside of the prison is a tremendous struggle—I see it—to find a job, to stay off drugs, to avoid old habits that lead them back to a life of crime, back to prison.

And as part of our unprecedented effort, our great Vice President, a true leader in the pro-life movement—Mike has been a true leader—has been working to elect more and more Republicans. We will be appealing to voters all across America who previously sent a Democrat to Washington, only to discover they elected a proxy vote for Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi. [Laughter] These are people that don't believe in borders, don't believe in fighting crime, don't believe in making a strong military. They don't believe in what the people in this room believe—that I can tell you. So we have to do a great job.

Acting Assistant Attorney General for the Criminal Division John R. Cronan. Thank you, Mr. President. On the very day that Attorney General Jeff Sessions was sworn in, you signed an Executive order with a very clear directive: reduce crime in America. And it is my honor to support carrying out your mandate by helping to bring MS-13 to justice and by working to dismantle this gang that's terrorizing our communities. I know people in this room are very familiar with the horrifying stats, but MS-13 is one of the most violent and formidable threats that our country faces today.

Deputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein. Thank you, Mr. President. Under your leadership, Attorney General Sessions has made violent crime and illegal immigration a top priority for the Department of Justice, and we're making tremendous progress. We're working in coordination with Homeland Security and with our other Federal partners, as well as State and local law enforcement.

Whether you're Black, White, Hispanic, green, purple, alien out of this space, there is a consequence. When you do a crime, there's a consequence. You're not going to get off easy. And especially, especially when you murder a child. That is unacceptable. Thank you.

So what happened is, in the middle, like, I sort of had second thoughts. You ever have second thoughts about something? I said, "You know, let's stop building the wall, because we get more pressure put on this crazy governor where the taxes are high and the crime is high." Other than that, he's doing a fantastic job, OK?
So, if you want the strong voters, if you want crime to stop—and, by the way, as a country, we have it way down. But then you take a look at a place like Chicago. What the hell is that mayor doing? What is he doing?
But we have—crime is down in the country. But we need Republicans, and we need to get out and vote for Marsha. [applause]
And we're going to defend our borders, and we're going to fight hard on crime. We're not going to let what's happened over the last long period of time—been going on for a long time. We have borders down 40 percent, and it's tough because our economy is doing so well. More people try and get in, so it makes it even tougher.
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
Under current law, we have only two policy options to respond to this massive crisis: We can either release all illegal immigrant families and minors who show up at the border from Central America, or we can arrest the adults for the Federal crime of illegal entry. Those are the only two options. Totally open borders or criminal prosecution for law-breaking. And you want to be able to do that. We don't want people pouring into our country. We want them to come in through the process, through the legal system. And we want, ultimately, a merit-based system where people come in based on merit.

And by the way, when we release the people they never come back to the judge anyway. [Laughter] They're gone. They're in your system. That's it. If they're good, that's great. And if they're bad, you'll have killings, you'll have murders, you'll have this, you'll have that, and you'll have crime. You'll have crime.

The United States has just surpassed Germany as having the most asylum seekers of any nation on Earth. Can you imagine that? Can you imagine? And Germany—we talk about Germany—they allowed millions of people in. And by the way, their crime, from the time they started, is up more than 10 percent. And that's one of the reasons it's at that level is because they don't like reporting that kind of crime, so they put it down as different kind of crime. But their crime is up more than 10 percent since they started taking them in.

The problem is, they never told anybody what they're doing. They didn't talk about tax cuts. By the way, they want to take away your tax cuts, and they want to substantially increase your taxes. They didn't talk about crime. All they talked about was Trump. So when people got to the booth, they said: "Ah, we're going to vote Democrat. We're going to vote Dem"—but then they get up, they said: "But what does she stand for? What do they stand for? They just hate Trump. No, I'm going with Trump." And that's what happened. [Laughter] We got tremendous Democrat support. It was a beautiful thing. That was a beautiful night. Do you agree? That was a beautiful night. That was some night. [Applause] That was some night.

We're having a lot of problems with Democrats. They don't want to vote for anything. They don't care about lack of security. They really would like to have open borders, where anybody in the world can just flow in, including from the Middle East. From—anybody, anywhere, they can just flow into our country. Tremendous problems with that. Tremendous crime caused by that. We're just not going to do it.

So I'm going to be signing an Executive order in a little while before I go to Minnesota. But at the same time, I think you have to understand: We're keeping families together, but we have to keep our borders strong. We will be overrun with crime and with people that should not be in our country.

The President. Yes. They affect everybody. Those images affect everybody. But I have to say that you have double standards. You have people that want absolute security and safety, and you have people that do look at the children. And then, you have people like me, and I think most of the people in this room, that want both. We want the heart, but we also want strong borders, and we want no crime.

We don't want crime in this country. We don't want people coming in. We don't want people coming in from the Middle East through our border, using children to get through the lines. We don't want that. We're doing too good a job to allow that to happen. So we're not going to allow that to happen.

Remember this: We need Democrat votes. Without the Democrats constantly obstructing, there's no way you can do it. Without having Democrats voting, there is no way you can get this done. So the Democrats are obstructing, the Democrats don't want border security, the Democrats are okay with crime, but we're not okay with it.

If you look at what the Democrats are doing—and Dean understands this better than anybody—if you look at what they're doing, they want to have a very weak border, a very open border, and that's going to lead to tremendous crime and a lot of problems for a lot of people, including jobs. It's going to be a very bad situation.

Sen. Heller. Mr. President, thank you very much for coming to Nevada—coming back to Nevada. You've been here many times. And for us here in Nevada, and listening to you, and hearing the issues that you discuss—health care, immigration, crime, tax issues, all these issues; how the economy is doing is important for all of us. So I want to thank you for all your hard work and effort.

What we have is very simple. We want strong borders, and we want no crime. Strong borders. We want no crime. The Democrats want open borders, and they don't care about crime, and they don't care about our military. I care about our military. That's what we want, and that's what we're going to get. And we're going to get it sooner than people think.

So, we're building the wall, we're fixing the wall, we're spending a lot of money, and we're going for more, and we'll get it done. But Democrats, they want open borders, and they don't mind crime. Think of it. [booing]
So, I defined it today, the Democrats want open borders and they don't mind crime. We want very tight, very strict borders, and by the way, you saw a 70 year or low, with all the complaining I'm doing, we've done a very good job, and we have taken thousands, we have taken--we got to get that wall built all the way across, and they don't want it, that's like a symbol.
No, no. No, no. This has become the party of Maxine Waters and Nancy Pelosi, that's who it is. So they don't mind crime, they want open borders, we one really tough borders, and we want people to come in, we want people to come in through the legal process, what about the thousands of people? What about the thousands of people that have gone through this process, that are waiting on line to come into our country, and then we're going to let these people pour in?
The ruling shows that all of the attacks from the media and the Democrat politicians are wrong, and they turned out to be very wrong. And what we're looking for, as Republicans, I can tell you, is strong borders, no crime. What the Democrats are looking at is open borders, which will bring tremendous crime. It will bring MS-13 and lots of others that we don't want to have in our country. It will bring tremendous crime.

President Trump. But what we really do is, we believe in very strong borders, no crime. And the Democrats believe in open borders and plenty of crime, because that's what you get with the open borders.

Republicans want strong borders and no crime. Very simple. Not complex. Democrats want open borders and crime, crime, crime happens automatically when you have those open borders. [booing]
Just days ago, a brave border agent was shot multiple times while protecting our border. Every day, border agents are keeping drugs, crime, and gangs from entering our country.
And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
Journalists, like all Americans, should be free from the fear of being violently attacked while doing their job. To the families of the victims: There are no words to express our sorrow for your loss. Horrible, horrible event. Horrible thing happened. In your suffering, we pledge our eternal support. The suffering is so great. I've seen some of the people. So great. My Government will not rest until we have done everything in our power to reduce violent crime and to protect innocent life. We will not ever leave your side. So our warmest, best wishes and regrets. Horrific, horrible thing. Thank you. [Applause] Thank you.

The men and women of the United States Coast Guard are doing a phenomenal job keeping America safe from drugs, crime, and terrorism, and we are incredibly grateful to each of you. And I have to say that, during the hurricanes, the Coast Guard saved 16,000 lives. It's an incredible achievement. Incredible.

Tester even voted no on enhanced vetting for refugees from terror-stricken countries. You believe this one? What's going on with that? The Democrats want open borders, which means lots of crime. We want tough, strong, powerful borders, and we want no crime and we're going to protect ICE. We protect ICE. [applause]
How did we get here? So, if you look at Jon Tester, he signed up for the Democrats' radical immigration agenda, which is "let them come in, and we believe," they say, "in sanctuary cities where they house the criminals and others." We believe in strong borders and no crime, it's very simple. Strong borders. We believe in coming into this country legally. We believe in coming in legally. [applause]
So we ought to support ICE, not do what the Democrats are doing. Democrats want open borders, and they don't mind crime. We want no crime, and we want borders where borders mean something. All right?

Today we've also discussed how we can deepen our work together to respond to malign state activity, terrorism, and serious crime. In particular, on Russia, I thanked President Trump for his support in responding to the appalling use of a nerve agent in Salisbury, after which he expelled 60 Russian intelligence officers. And I welcomed his meeting with President Putin in Helsinki on Monday. We agreed that it is important to engage Russia from a position of strength and unity and that we should continue to deter and counter all efforts to undermine our democracies.

Today, both Russia and the United States face a whole new set of challenges. Those include a dangerous maladjustment of mechanisms for maintaining international security and stability, regional crises, the creeping threats of terrorism and transnational crime. It's the snowballing problems in the economy, environmental risks, and other sets of challenges. We can only cope with these challenges if we join the ranks and work together. Hopefully, we will reach this understanding with our American partners.
We can offer that the appropriate commission headed by Special Attorney Mueller—he can use this treaty as a solid foundation, and send a formal, an official request to us so that we would interrogate—we would hold the questioning of these individuals who he believes are privy to some crimes. And our law enforcement are perfectly able to do this questioning and send the appropriate materials to the United States.
The forgotten men and women of our country are forgotten no more. The Democrats are trying to find out: "Who are these people that came out to vote? Where did they come from?" Remember that? "Where did they come from?" Now they know, but they're not going to the Democrats who are going so far left that nobody can believe it. They want open borders, and crime's okay. We want strong borders, and we want no crime. That's—other than that, we're very similar. [Applause]. Other than that, we're very similar.

The Democrats want to abandon ICE. They want to end ICE. "They're too strong." I saw one of the people get—"They're too strong. They're too strong." I think MS-13 is strong too. [Laughter] The only thing they understand is strength. They don't understand anything but strength. And ICE is tough and smart, and they track them down, and they stop tremendous amounts of crime. And these are great people, and they're not being treated properly. And the fact is, instead of supporting our ICE officers, many of these Democrat politicians who are, really, disciples of a very low-IQ person, Maxine Waters——

You know, every once in a while, you'll hear something, and usually, you understand. Like in deal-making, you always have to understand the other side. When you hear "open borders," when you hear "get rid of ICE," when you hear some of the things that they're proposing, it's like you can't even understand it. Can you imagine, open borders, you'd have millions of people pouring into our country—millions and millions of people—many people that you don't want in our country. But you would have millions of people pouring into our country. The crime would be unbelievable.

And they want to get rid of the crime fighter, on top of everything else. "Open the border, and get rid of your crime fighters." You don't understand it. Nobody understands it. But I hope they keep it up, because we're going to have a lot of fun in 4 months, and we're going to have a lot of fun in 2020 running against that.

So as part of my agreement with the European Union, they've agreed to purchase, almost immediately, large amounts of American soybeans, because China really tried to hurt the American farmer. China tried to hurt the American farmer, because that way they were going to hurt me. And that way, you would go, in November, and you would vote for people that don't want borders, they don't care about crime, they want to get rid of ICE. Democrats. How about the new one? They want to get rid of ICE.

Catch-and-release. How about that one? You catch a criminal, you take his name, and then you release him. He's got to show up to court within 4 or 5 years. [Laughter] In the meantime, they're committing crime in our country. These are the laws we have to work with. And despite that, we're setting records, but we have horrible, horrible immigration laws, and we're going to get them fixed. You've got to vote Republican, folks. You've got to vote Republican.

One of the critical lessons of 9/11 is that immigration enforcement saves lives. We must enforce the rules against visa fraud, illegal overstay, illegal entry, and other immigration violations and crimes; and crimes they are—believe me, crimes they are. These are the practices exploited by terrorists, drug dealers, child smugglers, human traffickers, gang members, and countless unknown and unregistered criminals to gain illicit access to our country and threaten our citizens.

In fiscal year 2017 alone, ICE arrested more than 127,000 aliens charged or convicted of crimes inside of the United States. These were very serious crimes and far too many of them. Yet leading Democrat politicians have called to abolish ICE—nobody even believes it, they want to abolish ICE—in other words, they want open borders and more crime. And that's what you're going to get. You'll get more crime as you open up those borders.

Mr. Giuliani. So congratulations. And what you've been doing is keeping your promises, and this is one of your promises. One of your promises was to shore up our country because one of the dangers we face—national security and crime—is cybersecurity. And a large part of our country, unlike other countries, is made up of the private sector. And the private sector is wide open to hacking. And sometimes, by hacking the private sector, you can get into Government.

So here, you're addressing not only a national security problem, but you're addressing the fastest growing form of crime in America, which is cyber theft. It's growing faster than any other crime.

We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing Federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation—take a look at Chicago and others—taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug-infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars, and we're not going to let it happen any longer.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
So I've directed the Department of Justice to take a firm, firm stance to protect our cops, sheriffs and police from crimes of violence against them. We will work with our police, not against our police. Our police do a great job, and they've never been troubled like they're troubled now. It's very unfair what's happening. So we want to cherish our law enforcement, and we will always protect those who protect us.

We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including our inner cities. We're going to make our inner cities safe again. Look at what's going on. Look at what's happening in Chicago: hundreds of shootings, hundreds of deaths. I'll tell you, what's happening in Chicago and many other places. Safety is a civil right, and we will fight to make America totally safe again. I've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy transnational criminal cartels, which are all over the United States, and we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into your country, into your community, into your cities, and poisoning our youth. We're stopping it. We're stopping it.

My budget increases spending, and the increase in all spending for Federal law enforcement also. And activities having to do with law enforcement will be substantially increased. And we will fight violent crime. You look at what's happening in our cities, you look at what's happening in Chicago—what's going on in Chicago? We will fight violent crime, and we will win. And we'll win that one fairly quickly. Once we give the local police, the local law enforcement the right to go in and fight it, and we back them monetarily and also otherwise—and we're going to win that one. We're going to win it fairly quickly, I believe.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The office is called VOICE: Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement. We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and silenced by special interests. Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose Government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.

We are going to drain the swamp of government corruption in Washington, D.C., and we are going to keep our promises -- all of the promises that we made. We are going to massively reduce your taxes. (Applause.) We are going to reduce very substantially rising crime, and support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.)

The President: I don't know yet. People want the border wall. My base definitely wants the border wall, my base really wants it — you've been to many of the rallies. OK, the thing they want more than anything is the wall. My base, which is a big base; I think my base is 45 percent. You know, it's funny. The Democrats, they have a big advantage in the electoral college. Big, big, big advantage. I've always said the popular vote would be a lot easier than the electoral college. The electoral college — but it's a whole different campaign [unintelligible]. The electoral college is very difficult for a Republican to win, and I will tell you, the people want to see it. They want to see the wall, they want to see security. Now, it just came out that they're 73 percent down. ... That's a tremendous achievement. ... Look at this, in 100 days, that down to the lowest in 17 years and it's going lower. Now, people aren't coming because they know they're not going to get through, and there isn't crime. You know the migration up to the border is horrible for women, you know that? [nintelligible] Now, much of that's stopped because they can't get through.

As members of the NRA know well, some of the most important decisions a President can make are appointments, and I've appointed people who believe in law, order, and justice. That is why I have selected as your Attorney General, number one, a really fine person, a really good man, a man who has spent his entire career fighting crime, supporting the police, and defending the Second Amendment. For the first time in a long time, you now have a pro-Second Amendment, tough-on-crime Attorney General, and his name is Jeff Sessions.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The President. We'll build the wall, folks. Don't even worry about it. Go to sleep. Go home, go to sleep. Rest assured. That's the final thing—we need it. We need it. And if the Democrats knew what the hell they were doing, they'd approve it so easy, because we want to stop crime in our country. Obviously, they don't mind illegals coming in. They don't mind drugs pouring in. They don't mind——

Audience members. Boo! The President. I've known him a long time. Senator Schumer is a bad leader, not a natural leader at all. He works hard to study leadership. When you have to study leadership, you've got problems. [Laughter] And his policies are hurting innocent Americans and making it easier for drug dealers to enter our country. Schumer is weak on crime and wants to raise your taxes through the roof.

In this effort to restore safety to our country, we are going to strongly support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. I just signed an Executive order directing Attorney General Jeff Sessions to combat crimes of violence against our police, and the Department of Justice is now prioritizing the prosecution of criminals who attack officers of the law.

From Lebanon to Iraq to Yemen, Iran funds, arms, and trains terrorists, militias, and other extremist groups that spread destruction and chaos across the region. For decades, Iran has fueled the fires of sectarian conflict and terror. It is a Government that speaks openly of mass murder, vowing the destruction of Israel, death to America, and ruin for many leaders and nations in this very room. Among Iran's most tragic and destabilizing interventions, you've seen it in Syria. Bolstered by Iran, Asad has committed unspeakable crimes, and the United States has taken firm action in response to the use of banned chemical weapons by the Asad regime, launching 59 missiles at the Syrian air base from where that murderous attack originated. Responsible nations must work together to end the humanitarian crisis in Syria, eradicate ISIS, and restore stability to the region and as quickly as possible.

And I'll tell you what, Karen is going to be really incredible. She is going to be joining some wonderful people and doing some wonderful work, including major, major tax cuts and health care and lots of things. Going to be reducing crime, and we're securing that Second Amendment. I told you about that. And that looks like it's in good shape with Judge Gorsuch. That looks like it's in good shape.

You're the first group I've told that to. A solar wall. Makes sense. Let's see. We're working it out. We'll see. Solar wall—panels. Beautiful. I mean, actually, think of it, the higher it goes, the more valuable it is. It's like—[laughter]. Pretty good imagination, right? Good? My idea. So we have a good shot. That's one of the places that solar really does work. The tremendous sun and heat. It really does work there. So we'll see what happens with that. That would be great. And I think we could make it look beautiful too. It would really look beautiful. So that would be nice. We're also working night and day to restore law and order to our country. Law and order. You know that. We're reversing the last administration's soft-on-crime policies that helped enable a tragic rise in violent crime. You see what's happening. Look at Chicago. What the hell is going on in Chicago? [Laughter] What's that all about?

Today, the West is also confronted by the powers that seek to test our will, undermine our confidence, and challenge our interests. To meet new forms of aggression, including propaganda, financial crimes, and cyberwarfare, we must adapt our alliance to compete effectively in new ways and on all new battlefields.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

The President. But you know, they all said, Mr. President, your speech was so good last night, please, please, Mr. President, don't mention any names. [Laughter] So I won't. I won't. No, I won't vote—one vote away. I will not mention any names. [Laughter] Very Presidential, isn't it? Very Presidential. And nobody wants me to talk about your other Senator, who's weak on borders, weak on crime. So I won't talk about him.

We do not need to limit the potential of our children by trapping them in failing government schools. Every child should have the chance to explore their talents, pursue their passions, and know the joy of achieving their ambitions. And we will never tolerate crime in our cities, bloodshed in our communities, or acts of hatred or terrorism against our citizens. We will not stand for it.

And if you look at, as an example, President Clinton pardoned Marc Rich, who was charged with crimes going back decades, including illegally buying oil from Iran while it held 53 American hostages—wasn't allowed to do that—selling to the enemies of the United States. He was pardoned after his wife donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Clintons.

But no, Mexico will pay for the wall. It may be through a reimbursement. We need the wall very badly. As you know, Mexico has a tremendous crime problem—tremendous—one of the number two or three in the world. And that's another reason we need it. And the—just to add on, tremendous drugs are pouring into the United States at levels that nobody has ever seen before. This happened over the last 3 to 4 years in particular. The wall will stop much of the drugs from pouring into this country and poisoning our youth.

But he is going to be great, because he's tough on crime, he's tough on borders. Don't worry. Don't even think about it.
My administration will provide its full support to the great State of Texas and all local authorities investigating this horrible crime. I've spoken just a few minutes ago with Governor Abbott, and we offer our thanks to the first responders, the FBI, all of the many people involved, both Federal and otherwise. Ultimately, they stopped the suspect and rendered immediate lifesaving aid to certain victims of the shooting.

The horror of life in North Korea is so complete that citizens pay bribes to Government officials to have themselves exported aboard as slaves. They would rather be slaves than live in North Korea. To attempt to flee is a crime punishable by death. One person who escaped remarked: "When I think about it now, I was not a human being. I was more like an animal. Only after leaving North Korea did I realize what life was supposed to be."

Considering the misery wrought by the North Korean dictatorship, it is no surprise that it has been forced to take increasingly desperate measures to prevent its people from understanding this brutal contrast. Because the regime fears the truth above all else, it forbids virtually all contact with the outside world. Not just my speech today, but even the most commonplace facts of South Korean life are forbidden knowledge to the North Korean people. Western and South Korean music is banned. Possession of foreign media is a crime punishable by death. Citizens spy on fellow citizens, their homes are subject to search at any time, and their every action is subject to surveillance. In place of a vibrant society, the people of North Korea are bombarded by state propaganda practically every waking hour of the day.

North Korea is not the paradise your grandfather envisioned. It is a hell that no person deserves. Yet, despite every crime you have committed against God and man, you are ready to offer, and we will do that—we will offer a path to a much better future. It begins with an end to the aggression of your regime, a stop to your development of ballistic missiles, and complete, verifiable, and total denuclearization.

On security issues, we continue to work with our Vietnamese partners and with partners across the region on a range of challenges, including maritime security, counterterrorism, human and drug trafficking, cybercrime, and disease prevention.

From Japan, we traveled to another key American ally in Asia, the Republic of Korea. My official state visit to South Korea was the first by an American President in 25 years. Speaking before the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea, I spoke the truth about the evil crimes of the North Korean regime, and I made clear that we will not allow this twisted dictatorship to hold the world hostage to nuclear blackmail.

The President. Yes. Just so you understand—just so you understand, there's been no collusion; there's been no crime. And in theory, everybody tells me I'm not under investigation. Maybe Hillary is, I don't know, but I'm not.

But there's been no collusion. There's been no crime. But we have been very open. We could have done it two ways. We could have been very closed, and it would have taken years. But you know, it's sort of like, when you've done nothing wrong, let's be open and get it over with.

As we strengthen friendships all around the world, we are also restoring clarity about our adversaries. When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom. I am asking Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the terrible Iran nuclear deal. My administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.

Otto Warmbier was a hard-working student at the University of Virginia, and a great student he was. On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea. At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to America last June, horribly injured and on the verge of death. He passed away just days after his return.

Today, if you catch somebody, they don't know what to do with them. He hasn't committed the crime, but he may very well. And there's no mental institution, there's no place to bring them. And we have that a lot. Even if they caught this person—I'm being nice when I use the word person—they probably wouldn't have known what to do. They're not going to put them in jail. And yet—so there's none of that middle ground of having that institution where you had trained people that could handle it and do something about it and find out how sick he really is. Because he is a sick guy. And he should have been nabbed a number of times, frankly.

As I said last week, we must work together to create a culture of our country that cherishes life and forces real human connections. We're also working to reduce violent crime in America and to make our communities places that can be totally safe for our children, for our families.
We're getting no help from the State of California. I mean, frankly, if I wanted to pull our people from California, you would have a crime nest like you've never seen in California. All I'd have to do is say, ICE and Border Patrol, let California alone. You'd be inundated—you would see crime like nobody has ever seen crime in this country. And yet we get no help from the State of California. They are doing a lousy management job. They have the highest taxes in the Nation, and they don't know what's happening out there.
And one last point. To the extent that this is about guns, let it be about the illicit use of guns used inappropriately or in crimes so that we can do what we do in Indiana and that we need to work on continually, is to enhance the penalties for any type of offense that's used with a firearm. Let's double down on that. If you commit a burglary or robbery with a firearm, you need to pay a severe consequence.
Reducing violent crime in America is a top priority for my administration, and we will do whatever it takes to get it done. No talk. We're going to do what it takes to get it done.

In 2017, our brave ICE officers arrested more than 100,000 criminal aliens who have committed tens of thousands of crimes. And believe me, these are great people. They cannot—the laws are just against us. They're against—they're against safety. They don't make sense. And you meet with Democrats, and they're always fighting for the criminal. They're not fighting for law-abiding citizens. They're always fighting for the criminal. Doesn't make sense.

The President. Here are just some of the criminal charges and convictions for the aliens arrested by ICE: 11,000 charges or convictions for sex crimes; 48,000 for assault; 13,000 for burglary; and 1,800 for killing people.

Decades of progress made in bringing down crime are now being reversed by this Administration's rollback of criminal enforcement.
And when a Secretary of State illegally stores her emails on a private server, deletes 33,000 of them so the authorities can't see her crime, puts our country at risk, lies about it in every different form and faces no consequence – I know that corruption has reached a level like never ever before in our country.
When the FBI Director says that the Secretary of State was "extremely careless" and "negligent," in handling our classified secrets, I also know that these terms are minor compared to what she actually did. They were just used to save her from facing justice for her terrible terrible crimes.
In fact, her single greatest accomplishment may be committing such an egregious crime and getting away with it – especially when others who have done far less, have paid so dearly. When that same Secretary of State rakes in millions and millions of dollars trading access and favors to special interests and foreign powers, I know the time for action has come.
We will bring the same economic success to America that Mike brought to Indiana, which is amazing. He is a man of character and accomplishment. He is the man for the job. The first task for our new Administration will be to liberate our citizens from the crime and terrorism and lawlessness that threatens their communities.
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing Federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation—take a look at Chicago and others—taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug-infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars, and we're not going to let it happen any longer.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
So I've directed the Department of Justice to take a firm, firm stance to protect our cops, sheriffs and police from crimes of violence against them. We will work with our police, not against our police. Our police do a great job, and they've never been troubled like they're troubled now. It's very unfair what's happening. So we want to cherish our law enforcement, and we will always protect those who protect us.

We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including our inner cities. We're going to make our inner cities safe again. Look at what's going on. Look at what's happening in Chicago: hundreds of shootings, hundreds of deaths. I'll tell you, what's happening in Chicago and many other places. Safety is a civil right, and we will fight to make America totally safe again. I've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy transnational criminal cartels, which are all over the United States, and we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into your country, into your community, into your cities, and poisoning our youth. We're stopping it. We're stopping it.

My budget increases spending, and the increase in all spending for Federal law enforcement also. And activities having to do with law enforcement will be substantially increased. And we will fight violent crime. You look at what's happening in our cities, you look at what's happening in Chicago—what's going on in Chicago? We will fight violent crime, and we will win. And we'll win that one fairly quickly. Once we give the local police, the local law enforcement the right to go in and fight it, and we back them monetarily and also otherwise—and we're going to win that one. We're going to win it fairly quickly, I believe.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The office is called VOICE: Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement. We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and silenced by special interests. Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose Government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.

Our Attorney General, Jeff Sessions, is working very hard on this problem. It takes a lot of his time, because this causes so much of the crime that you——

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The President. We'll build the wall, folks. Don't even worry about it. Go to sleep. Go home, go to sleep. Rest assured. That's the final thing—we need it. We need it. And if the Democrats knew what the hell they were doing, they'd approve it so easy, because we want to stop crime in our country. Obviously, they don't mind illegals coming in. They don't mind drugs pouring in. They don't mind——

Audience members. Boo! The President. I've known him a long time. Senator Schumer is a bad leader, not a natural leader at all. He works hard to study leadership. When you have to study leadership, you've got problems. [Laughter] And his policies are hurting innocent Americans and making it easier for drug dealers to enter our country. Schumer is weak on crime and wants to raise your taxes through the roof.

In this effort to restore safety to our country, we are going to strongly support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. I just signed an Executive order directing Attorney General Jeff Sessions to combat crimes of violence against our police, and the Department of Justice is now prioritizing the prosecution of criminals who attack officers of the law.

President Santos and I had a very productive meeting, and we will continue to work very closely together to bring peace, safety, and prosperity to the hemisphere. Perhaps no area is really more important in terms of cooperation than our joint effort to end the terrible drug crimes that plague both of our countries.

The United States and Colombia, they're both democracies of greater—of longer standing in the hemisphere, we have supported each other. Our soldiers fought shoulder to shoulder in the Korean war. At the request of the United States, we sent antidrug experts to Afghanistan. And today, Colombia and the United States are working together to support Central America in their fight against drug cartels and the violence of organized crime.

Such as we said today, we are working with your administration to take advantage of the unique opportunity peace offers so as to reduce permanently the production of coca leaf in Colombia and fight more effectively the other links in drug trafficking, including consumption. We must continue and deepen the fight against organized crime, transnational crime responsible not just for drug trafficking, but also for human trafficking and illegal mining.

Mr. Baker. For you—yes, sir, Mr. President. My question is, as someone who led a nation that's really done a lot of rebuilding and had to rebound from an epidemic of crime and drugs over quite a many years, what do you make of Mr. Trump's America first policy? And further, you've had a tough time with conservative radio, sometimes been called a punching bag. And you've said you have to persevere. I'm curious if you've given any advice to President Trump on how to do so.

Attorney General Jefferson B. Sessions III. Mr. President, it's great to be here and celebrate this group. We are receiving, as you know—I'm not sure the rest of you fully understand—the support with law enforcement all over America. They have been very frustrated. They are so thrilled that we have a new idea that we're going to support them and work together to properly, lawfully fight the rising crime that we're seeing.

In that terrible crime, we also witnessed the incredible heroism of Capitol Police. Special Agent Crystal Griner—who I also had the honor of meeting during my visit to the Hospital—raced into gunfire, along with Special Agent David Bailey. They saved the lives of our Members of Congress and prevented that dark day from becoming a tragedy beyond imagination. They, like so many other courageous police officers, represent the very best of us. We salute them, and we also salute members of Alexandria Police, Fire, and Rescue.

Many of you witnessed terrible crimes committed in service of a depraved ideology. You saw the dreams of generations held by captive, and just, literally, you look at what happened and what communism has done. You knew faces that disappeared, innocents locked in prisons, and believers persecuted for preaching the word of God. You watched the Women in White bruised, bloodied, and captured on their way from Mass. You have heard the chilling cries of loved ones or the cracks of firing squads piercing through the ocean breeze, not a good sound.
The President. [Laughter] Thank you. Thank you. No, we keep our promise. And now that I am your President, America will expose the crimes of the Castro regime and stand with the Cuban people in their struggle for freedom. Because we know it is best for America to have freedom in our hemisphere, whether in Cuba or Venezuela, and to have a future where the people of each country can live out their own dreams.
And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

Democrats in Congress want open borders, higher taxes, and Government-run health care that doesn't work—costs a fortune, doesn't work. They're soft on crime, and they want to suffocate our economy with socialist-style regulation, raise your taxes through the sky. They don't want to vote for our tax cuts because they want the exact—they want tax increases. That's why we need a Republican in the House. We need a Republican in the Senate. We need more of them.

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

The President. Yes. Just so you understand—just so you understand, there's been no collusion; there's been no crime. And in theory, everybody tells me I'm not under investigation. Maybe Hillary is, I don't know, but I'm not.

But there's been no collusion. There's been no crime. But we have been very open. We could have done it two ways. We could have been very closed, and it would have taken years. But you know, it's sort of like, when you've done nothing wrong, let's be open and get it over with.

And by the way, the court — it wasn't me. The courts were not upholding that executive order. You have to do it through Congress. I want to solve the DACA problem. I will consider that a great achievement to solve the DACA problem. It's been out there for a long time. These are good people, these are people that should be able to stay in this country. We're going to solve the DACA problem. But we also want to solve a tremendous problem on the southern border, which is crime. We need a wall, we need the drugs to stop flowing in. They are coming in like — well, they're coming in less now than they were because we have a very strong — we have great Border Patrol agents, great ICE — we have great people and they are really doing a good job. And you see what's happening at the border, it's much better.

As we strengthen friendships all around the world, we are also restoring clarity about our adversaries. When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom. I am asking Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the terrible Iran nuclear deal. My administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.

Otto Warmbier was a hard-working student at the University of Virginia, and a great student he was. On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea. At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to America last June, horribly injured and on the verge of death. He passed away just days after his return.

Today, if you catch somebody, they don't know what to do with them. He hasn't committed the crime, but he may very well. And there's no mental institution, there's no place to bring them. And we have that a lot. Even if they caught this person—I'm being nice when I use the word person—they probably wouldn't have known what to do. They're not going to put them in jail. And yet—so there's none of that middle ground of having that institution where you had trained people that could handle it and do something about it and find out how sick he really is. Because he is a sick guy. And he should have been nabbed a number of times, frankly.

As I said last week, we must work together to create a culture of our country that cherishes life and forces real human connections. We're also working to reduce violent crime in America and to make our communities places that can be totally safe for our children, for our families.
We're getting no help from the State of California. I mean, frankly, if I wanted to pull our people from California, you would have a crime nest like you've never seen in California. All I'd have to do is say, ICE and Border Patrol, let California alone. You'd be inundated—you would see crime like nobody has ever seen crime in this country. And yet we get no help from the State of California. They are doing a lousy management job. They have the highest taxes in the Nation, and they don't know what's happening out there.
And one last point. To the extent that this is about guns, let it be about the illicit use of guns used inappropriately or in crimes so that we can do what we do in Indiana and that we need to work on continually, is to enhance the penalties for any type of offense that's used with a firearm. Let's double down on that. If you commit a burglary or robbery with a firearm, you need to pay a severe consequence.
You remember, I'd come into big rooms, big audiences, and I'd say, what do you have to lose? Because the Democrats have always had that vote. I said, what do you have to lose? Horrible on crime. Horrible on education. Horrible on everything. I say, what do you have to lose? And they voted for me, and we won. But now the numbers are much higher than they ever were with African American—but we're happy.

As we secure out borders, we're also supporting the heroes who fight crime, serve our citizens, and secure our streets: our brave men and brave women in blue. We love them. In my administration, we have a simple policy: We will protect those who protect us. You saw what I did with the military equipment, the excess equipment that was sitting all over the country in warehouses, never to be used again. And other administrations, they just didn't want to give it to the police. They said: "It's too much protection. It looks too strong. It looks like military." Guess what? It's now being distributed all over to our police forces. And it's better than they could ever buy. Can't buy stuff like that.

Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
Actually I, sort of, changed my mind after we started. I called my people, I said, "How much would it cost to stop building the wall in San Diego so they go out and advocate for us because they're desperate for their wall. Because they don't like people running over their front yards and all of the problems, including by the way massive amounts of crime?" I said, "How much would it cost to stop"—I'm in the construction business it's what I do best.
So what happened is, in the middle, like, I sort of had second thoughts. You ever have second thoughts about something? I said, "You know, let's stop building the wall, because we get more pressure put on this crazy governor where the taxes are high and the crime is high." Other than that, he's doing a fantastic job, OK?
So, if you want the strong voters, if you want crime to stop—and, by the way, as a country, we have it way down. But then you take a look at a place like Chicago. What the hell is that mayor doing? What is he doing?
But we have—crime is down in the country. But we need Republicans, and we need to get out and vote for Marsha. [applause]
And we're going to defend our borders, and we're going to fight hard on crime. We're not going to let what's happened over the last long period of time—been going on for a long time. We have borders down 40 percent, and it's tough because our economy is doing so well. More people try and get in, so it makes it even tougher.
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
Under current law, we have only two policy options to respond to this massive crisis: We can either release all illegal immigrant families and minors who show up at the border from Central America, or we can arrest the adults for the Federal crime of illegal entry. Those are the only two options. Totally open borders or criminal prosecution for law-breaking. And you want to be able to do that. We don't want people pouring into our country. We want them to come in through the process, through the legal system. And we want, ultimately, a merit-based system where people come in based on merit.

And by the way, when we release the people they never come back to the judge anyway. [Laughter] They're gone. They're in your system. That's it. If they're good, that's great. And if they're bad, you'll have killings, you'll have murders, you'll have this, you'll have that, and you'll have crime. You'll have crime.

The United States has just surpassed Germany as having the most asylum seekers of any nation on Earth. Can you imagine that? Can you imagine? And Germany—we talk about Germany—they allowed millions of people in. And by the way, their crime, from the time they started, is up more than 10 percent. And that's one of the reasons it's at that level is because they don't like reporting that kind of crime, so they put it down as different kind of crime. But their crime is up more than 10 percent since they started taking them in.

The problem is, they never told anybody what they're doing. They didn't talk about tax cuts. By the way, they want to take away your tax cuts, and they want to substantially increase your taxes. They didn't talk about crime. All they talked about was Trump. So when people got to the booth, they said: "Ah, we're going to vote Democrat. We're going to vote Dem"—but then they get up, they said: "But what does she stand for? What do they stand for? They just hate Trump. No, I'm going with Trump." And that's what happened. [Laughter] We got tremendous Democrat support. It was a beautiful thing. That was a beautiful night. Do you agree? That was a beautiful night. That was some night. [Applause] That was some night.

The ruling shows that all of the attacks from the media and the Democrat politicians are wrong, and they turned out to be very wrong. And what we're looking for, as Republicans, I can tell you, is strong borders, no crime. What the Democrats are looking at is open borders, which will bring tremendous crime. It will bring MS-13 and lots of others that we don't want to have in our country. It will bring tremendous crime.

Republicans want strong borders and no crime. Very simple. Not complex. Democrats want open borders and crime, crime, crime happens automatically when you have those open borders. [booing]
Just days ago, a brave border agent was shot multiple times while protecting our border. Every day, border agents are keeping drugs, crime, and gangs from entering our country.
And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
Journalists, like all Americans, should be free from the fear of being violently attacked while doing their job. To the families of the victims: There are no words to express our sorrow for your loss. Horrible, horrible event. Horrible thing happened. In your suffering, we pledge our eternal support. The suffering is so great. I've seen some of the people. So great. My Government will not rest until we have done everything in our power to reduce violent crime and to protect innocent life. We will not ever leave your side. So our warmest, best wishes and regrets. Horrific, horrible thing. Thank you. [Applause] Thank you.

The forgotten men and women of our country are forgotten no more. The Democrats are trying to find out: "Who are these people that came out to vote? Where did they come from?" Remember that? "Where did they come from?" Now they know, but they're not going to the Democrats who are going so far left that nobody can believe it. They want open borders, and crime's okay. We want strong borders, and we want no crime. That's—other than that, we're very similar. [Applause]. Other than that, we're very similar.

The Democrats want to abandon ICE. They want to end ICE. "They're too strong." I saw one of the people get—"They're too strong. They're too strong." I think MS-13 is strong too. [Laughter] The only thing they understand is strength. They don't understand anything but strength. And ICE is tough and smart, and they track them down, and they stop tremendous amounts of crime. And these are great people, and they're not being treated properly. And the fact is, instead of supporting our ICE officers, many of these Democrat politicians who are, really, disciples of a very low-IQ person, Maxine Waters——

You know, every once in a while, you'll hear something, and usually, you understand. Like in deal-making, you always have to understand the other side. When you hear "open borders," when you hear "get rid of ICE," when you hear some of the things that they're proposing, it's like you can't even understand it. Can you imagine, open borders, you'd have millions of people pouring into our country—millions and millions of people—many people that you don't want in our country. But you would have millions of people pouring into our country. The crime would be unbelievable.

And they want to get rid of the crime fighter, on top of everything else. "Open the border, and get rid of your crime fighters." You don't understand it. Nobody understands it. But I hope they keep it up, because we're going to have a lot of fun in 4 months, and we're going to have a lot of fun in 2020 running against that.

Worst of all, Democrats want to . . . you know that. They want to open our borders. They want to let crime, tremendous crime into our country. We can't do it. [booing]
Republicans want strong borders and no crime; Democrats want open borders, which equals massive crime. And on top of that, the Democrats . . . Nancy Pelosi, the whole group, Maxine . . . Maxine. She likes me a lot. She likes me a lot. [booing]
Because we have to remember they're putting up . . . I know some of the candidates, these are people that don't care about stopping crime. These are people that don't care about people pouring into our country when they shouldn't be here.
Our focus on opportunity for every citizen includes helping former prisoners. These citizens reentering society have had a tough time. We want them to get jobs so they don't have to return to a life of crime and go back into the same prison where they just got out. I mean, this has been a tremendous problem. And the best thing we could do, actually, is exactly what we're doing: creating an environment where the country is doing so well.

We cannot have opportunity without safety. We're working every day with local and Federal law enforcement to reduce violent crime all over the country. I mean, you look all over the world—you think—but all over our country. And the numbers are going down.

They only want to go after Republicans. You look at the kind of criminal actions and crime, they only want to go after the Republicans.
But Bob Casey wants open borders, which means crime. It means crime. You see this. He wants people to pour in, and if they pour in by the millions, that's, I guess, OK. I don't get it.
And you've heard this but I'm going to say it over and over because I'm really proud of it: Remember I said, "What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose?" African-Americans and so many others, I said, "What do you have to lose? You have high crime rates. You have horrible education. You have this"--I went through a list of 10, that's what happened. And I looked and I said, "You've been totally giving your votes to Democrats. They've let you down." I said, "What the hell do you have to lose?" [applause]
But when Bernie tells how wonderful things are, think of it, he wants to raise your taxes, he wants to create massive amounts of crime, he wants to open your borders. Think of it. Just think of it.
Governor J. Nathan Deal of Georgia. Well, thank you, Mr. President. I appreciate the opportunity to be here. We're very pleased with what's happening in Georgia. We have seen, since I became Governor, a 10-percent decrease in violent crime in our State, a 20-percent overall decrease in crime. We have seen our African American percentage in our prison system drop significantly. Black American—Black males has dropped almost 30 percent.

And I can tell you, I had to call a lot of my Republicans into the Governor's office and convince them to vote for this bill. And they were worried it was soft on crime. They were hesitant about what they were going to tell their people back home. And I said, "You tell them to call me." Because crime is down 6 percent. We have 3,000 less inmates. We saved $40 million since 2014.

Second, I'd like to follow up on what some of you Governors have said: These programs work. As you know, and others at the table know, I was U.S. attorney in Miami. And when you talk with the law enforcement communities, what they will tell you is that these programs foster public safety. When someone leaves prison, the best that could happen for them is for them to find a job. The best that can happen for society is for them to find a job and start contributing to society, rather than go back to the old ways of crime.

We're also working to reduce violent crime and to help our great law enforcement, including the very brave men and women of ICE, who have been absolutely abused. They are tremendous people. They're brave. They're strong. They're tough. And they're good. They're good people.

So we're working with countries to the south of us to help them understand other options for migrations flows to protect their communities at the beginning of that journey so they don't pay smugglers. There's a whole variety of Cabinet members here that are working on the fight against TCOs. We're having a lot of success against that type of a crime and criminal as well.

Today's Democrats are not just extreme, they're really not in a position to govern. They're just not in a position to govern, when you look at what they are and what they're doing: open borders and crime. It's open borders and crime.
The platform of the Democrat Party is to raise your taxes, increase your regulations, shut down American energy, release violent criminals, and destroy American jobs. It really is. You know, I guess I could put it a little bit softer than that, but that's really their policy. Open borders equals crime, tremendous crime, the hardest kind of crime.
You know, with African American folks, I used to be at big rallies, and I'd read all of the problems. Highest crime, toughest areas, worst schools—all of these horrible, lowest—the worst homeownership of any group by far. And I was reading them just one after another. There were like 10 pieces, and every one was a horror show, but especially anything having to do with crime and education.
We are holding drug traffickers accountable for their crimes. We are really going after the traffickers; I have always said that's the biggest thing. And frankly, the punishment is getting stronger and stronger. Maybe, at some point, we'll get very smart as a nation and give them the ultimate punishment.

They're the old and corrupt, globalist, ruling class that squandered trillions of dollars on foreign adventures. They don't want to build the wall here, although we've started, but it's not easy. But they'll build walls in other countries. They'll create borders in other lands so far away. But over here, let everybody pour in and we don't worry about the crime. It's a disgrace. [booing]
Democrats want to open borders, which really equals allowing into our country massive amounts of crime. Republicans want strong borders, we want no crime, we want great law enforcement. And by the way, we love our law enforcement. [applause]
So I want to thank, and I want to congratulate—they're incredible people. They're working hard. And we're working against a tide of blue. And the tide of blue—you know, they want to have open borders. They don't mind crime. They don't take care of our military. They don't take care of our vets. We're taking great care of our vets. What we're doing for our vets: choice, accountability. How about, after 48 years, we got choice approved. So veterans now can go, and if they have a long wait, they say bye-bye, I'm going to see the doctor next door, and we pay for the bill.

And I'll tell you what, I think it's going to be really hard for open-border, crime-infested Democrats to win that guy's vote. Maybe I'm wrong. But we're not wrong too often, are we?

You've heard me say this many times. I'm very proud of it. Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose?" Because I'd read these horrible statistics—highest crime, worst education, all the bad things; lowest homeownership—about African Americans. And they've always voted for Democrats. Not all, but a big proportion.

Can you believe it? Maxine Waters. She' sure something. But he's going to vote for Schumer. They're going to do whatever they say. They--I will say this. I will say this. The one thing, their policies are horrible. They're for open borders, meaning let all the crime come in. They're against so many things that you want.
Democrats want to raise your taxes. They want to raise them. I don't get it. I don't think I could win if I said I'm going to raise your--ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to raise your taxes. Oh, good. Alice, I don't we're voting for that guy. They want to raise your taxes. I don't know. Maybe they know something I don't know. Blue wave? We're going to raise your taxes. We're going to let crime go all throughout our country. We're going to get rid of ICE, so that as the crime comes in, we're going to have none of our people that are so tough--these are great people, but these are tough, strong--these are--these are warriors. These are warriors.
So they want to raise your taxes, they want to open your borders, they want crime to pour in, because that's what's going to happen when you open your borders. How about the governor, the governorship of California? He just announced that he wants to open borders and he wants to let anybody come in that wants to. And then he wants to pay for all medical, for all school.
Democrats also want open borders. And all of that equals massive costs. Massive. And massive crime and massive tears. Tears. You look at the families that have been so badly hurt. Republicans want strong borders. We want to finish the wall. We're up to $3.2 billion. We've done a lot of work on the wall. A lot of people don't understand that. But that's OK. Got to finish the wall.
We're going to have no crime. We want to protect America's great people and its great citizens. We want to protect American benefits, and we're doing that, and I've done it. In Maryland, the Democrat candidate for governor wants to give illegal aliens free college tuition, courtesy of the American taxpayer. [booing]
What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose? Remember? Ha. Remember, I said, what do you have to lose? People said, oh, that's not nice. I said, hey, I go through a chart, it talked about the highest crime rates, the worst education, the worst homeownership. I'd go through--and I just looked up one night and I said, you've always been with the Democrats. Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose? Remember that, right? Right?[applause]
The Democrats would bankrupt the safety net through totally unlimited and uncontrolled immigration. You will see crime like you've never, ever seen before. The policies of their party aren't just extreme. Frankly, they're dangerous, and they're crazy.
Democrats want to open borders, which equals massive crime coming into our country. Republicans want strong borders, and we want no crime.
You're voting for me. A vote for any Democrat this November is a vote for massive regulation, massive taxes, and I hate to say it, massive crime, because crime comes with it. [booing]
Democrats want to open borders, which equals massive crime. Republicans want strong border, and we want no crime. We don't want crime. Democrat support sanctuary cities, cities of crime. [applause]
Crime--think of it, crime and high taxes. Now there's only things we won't even get in, but how do you get past those first two things? Crime--that's the democrats, crime and high taxes. And we're doing things about it, folks.
And between the Democrats, who are obstructionists, who are people that don't want to see strong military, they don't want borders, they don't mind crime . . . [booing] . . . and their enablers, the fake news media, right back there. [booing]
And crime will flow in to our country through these open borders. Other than that, we'll be doing very well. It's crazy.
Stop the crime. You know, I said the other night, and I said, you know, I think I'm going to keep it. It's a little harsh, but I think I'll keep it. Democrats are the party of crime. How does that sound? It's true. It's true.  [applause]
They're the party of crime. Sounds a little tough, but it's true. Open borders.
Again, Second Amendment, higher taxes, lots of crime, MS-13, get used to them. No ICE. We don't want ICE, they say. [booing]
And remember what I said. It's the party of crime. Democrats--they really are. You look at what they're doing. Even look at what they're doing in Congress. Even look at what they're doing with our laws, the way they treat our laws, the way they treat our, our country. What they do in Congress. They are indeed the party of crime.
Every day, innocent lives are stolen because of Democrat-supported immigrant policies. If you just take a look, you have immigration policies that are so bad, so dangerous. Just recently in California, an illegal alien with a sex crime conviction and other convictions had a prior deportation. They wanted to deport this person. They never did. He was convicted for killing a local football coach who leaves behind a wife and six beautiful kids. A pillar of the community. By the way, this is all over. You could go--you could do this for days.
It's a vote to reduce crime, respect law enforcement, and restore the rule of law. Very simple. [applause]
Mr. Moore. Allegedly, it's for conspiracy from prison, from State prison. You know, it's alleged. But we do believe even if he did commit those crimes, the sentence was overly broad and too strict.

Mr. Moore. Six consecutive life sentences in the most secure prison in the world, also known as "a clean version of hell," for basically an economic crime.

Democrats have become the party of crime. It's true. Who would believe you could say that and nobody even challenges it? Nobody . . . you . . . who would believe . . . I said . . . started a couple of months ago. I said, you know, they've really become the party of crime. I said, I'm going to put that in. I'm going to say that when I make speeches. Nobody's ever challenged it. Maybe they have. Who knows? I have to always say that, because then they'll say they did actually challenge it, and they'll put like . . . then they'll say he gets a Pinocchio.
So maybe they did challenge it, but not very much. It's become really . . . they have become the party of crime because of what they do. They would rather devastate American communities than defend America's borders. The Democrat Party has become too extreme to be trusted with power. Their radical policies are a danger to your family and to your country.
But a man that – you're right, what do you expect? The one thing they're good at -- I'll tell you what, they're lousy politicians, they have horrible policy. Thing of this: you're running for office and your policy is raise taxes and open borders, and crime. Because, basically, it's crime. How do you win an election, how do you do it?
The new platform of the Democrat Party is radical socialism and open borders, which leads to crime, tremendous crime. As we speak, the Democrat Party -- you know, I used to -- everybody used to call it the Democratic Party. That's not the name. And it reads so much nicer. It sounds better. They ought to actually -- I'll give them a little hint, they should change their name to the Democratic Party. But I call it the Democrat Party, because that's what it is. It's called the Democrat Party. I watch where they're saying the Democratic Party. Usually, in many -- in many cases, those are people that want to make it look as good as possible. But it is, it's the Democrat Party, which doesn't read well. The other reads better. But we're going to call it the Democrat Party. And it's openly inviting millions of illegal aliens to break our laws, violate our borders, and overwhelm our nation. The Democrats want caravans. They like the caravans. A lot of people say, "I wonder who started that caravan?"
You know, explain that to me. They're for open borders, which means crime, and for massive tax cuts. They're against law enforcement, they're totally against ICE and law enforcement. They're against your military, and they're not good to your vets. How do you win on that platform? No, how do you win?[booing]
The President. That's beautiful. That is really beautiful. This is a beautiful meeting. I have to be honest with you. I go to a lot of them. Some of them, I'm, you know, a little bored. [Laughter] I do my thing, I say my words, I say "Bye, everybody." [Laughter] And I go, and I say, you know, "It was all right." But this is a very exciting—to me, this is a very exciting group. Every citizen benefits from tax cuts, regulation cuts, and millions more of great-paying jobs. Look at jobs. Every citizen benefits from lower crime, safer communities, and school choice.

The President. Remember? Remember? Ben remembers that one. No, I'm making a speech, and I'm—I literally had like 20 points about how badly Black Americans are being treated, African Americans are being treated. And it was point after point: highest crime rate, highest this, worst household ownership, worst education—I'm reading these points—I'm reading them. And I had never seen them before; they were so bad. The crime was horrible in the African American communities.

So I'm reading these points. Every one of them is run by the Democrats, every one of those—every one. And so I'm reading: crime, worst education, worst median income—everything. Just point after point. Highest employment rate in the whole country by far. By the way, African American youth unemployment rate, like, 58 percent. Fifty-eight percent.

But you know, as I was flying on Air Force One, I said to my people, because of the horrible tragedy—I mean, I almost shouldn't say this, but people that have done this and do this for a living—tough living—people that went in as first responders, police officers, law enforcement, that have seen many crime scenes—they said this is one of the worst that they've seen. They've seen many horrible crime scenes. They said this is one of the worst they've seen.

And when you have crimes like this, whether it's this one or another one on another group, we have to bring back the death penalty. [applause]
Very simple. Now, I did a little tiny bit of research. And Mike's opponent, Brendan Kelly, is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and, of course, Maxine Waters--[booing]-- and their job-killing agenda. Brendan Kelly opposes your tax cuts. He's weak on crime. He's for open borders. Can you believe some--seriously. Forget about--forget about Brendan Kelly. Let's say you're a politician and you're running on this platform, open borders, we're going to take care of illegal aliens' health care. OK? Think of it. We're going to raise your taxes. Think of it. How do you--how do you win a race like that? Seriously. How does anybody win a race like that? I don't know.
Republicans want strong borders, no crime, and no caravans, right? [applause]
Republicans want strong borders, no crime, no chaos, and no caravans. [applause]
Democrats want open borders, and they want to invite caravan after caravan into our country, which brings crime upon crime. [booing]
If you want high taxes and high crime, vote for the Democrats. Vote for the Democrats.
It's catch. We have no choice. If you want low taxes and low crime, vote Republican. [applause]
Andrew Gillum is a failed mayor. In Tallahassee, they've had the highest crime rate in Florida under his leadership. And last year, they had the highest number of murders in the history of the city. [booing]
Andrew Gillam is too extreme for the people of Florida. You're not going to . . . you're not going to take it long. And he's also weak on crime. On Andrew Gillam's watch, there were more murders last year . . . you just heard it . . . I think Ron probably saw my speech, but everybody knows it . . . than any year in the history of Tallahassee. You know that.
We do a very good job considering the laws are so bad. They're not archaic, they're incompetent. It's not that they're old, they're just bad. And we can't get any Democrat votes to change them. It's only the Republicans that are in unison; they want to change them. They want to make strong borders, want to get rid of any crime because of the borders, of which there's a lot.

We're committed to securing our borders to reduce crime, illegal drugs, human trafficking, especially in border counties. We have a lot of the border counties represented.
So we're going to be very tough on crime. So we're going to be very tough on the drugs pouring in, and that's a big part of the crime. We're going to be very strong at the border. We have no choice. And we're going to be building a wall. We're starting very soon. General Kelly will be working with a lot of you. And he's fantastic. He was the one who got approved very quickly along with General Mattis. He's very, very outstanding. And I very much appreciate that you're here today.
Laramie County, WY, Sheriff Danny L. Glick. Mr. President, thank you. It's such an honor to be here. I'm Danny Glick, sheriff of Laramie County, Wyoming. You know, there are so many issues that you'll hear going around this table. One of the ones that probably isn't—that people don't realize is EPA decisions that have affected our coal industry, our oil industry in the West. But beyond that, it increases the number of people that are jobless and thus increases our crime statistics. And it's starting to overwhelm us. We're very small out there for the most part, and we don't have the numbers of deputies, officers, and law enforcement that can sometimes keep up with this. I appreciate what you've done and what you're planning in the future. I think it was very well publicized, and I just appreciate being here today.
The President. How much of your crime is caused, do you think, by drugs generally?
Acting Attorney General Boente. I am aware of that, Mr. President. And we have gotten a great deal of criticism for the asset forfeiture, which, as the sheriff said, frequently was taking narcotics proceeds and other proceeds of crime. But there has been a lot of pressure on the Department to curtail some of that. The President. So what do you do? So, in other words, they have a huge stash of drugs. So in the old days, you take it. Now we're criticized if we take it. So who gets it? What happens to it? You tell them to keep it? [Laughter]
We're going to go into the Oval Office. Does anybody have anything to—not even a question, a statement, as to how we can bring about law enforcement in a very good, civil, lovely way, but we have to stop crime—right? Would anybody like to make a statement?
Today, if you catch somebody, they don't know what to do with them. He hasn't committed the crime, but he may very well. And there's no mental institution, there's no place to bring them. And we have that a lot. Even if they caught this person—I'm being nice when I use the word person—they probably wouldn't have known what to do. They're not going to put them in jail. And yet—so there's none of that middle ground of having that institution where you had trained people that could handle it and do something about it and find out how sick he really is. Because he is a sick guy. And he should have been nabbed a number of times, frankly.

But we also felt that, if you look at the concealed carry population, these are people, by and large, who are helping us stop crimes. These are people who are well trained, who actually go out there and help prevent crimes. So I would hope that that's not immediately dismissed because there is a lot of talk of just putting that on the side and——

So what happened is, in the middle, like, I sort of had second thoughts. You ever have second thoughts about something? I said, "You know, let's stop building the wall, because we get more pressure put on this crazy governor where the taxes are high and the crime is high." Other than that, he's doing a fantastic job, OK?
So, if you want the strong voters, if you want crime to stop—and, by the way, as a country, we have it way down. But then you take a look at a place like Chicago. What the hell is that mayor doing? What is he doing?
But we have—crime is down in the country. But we need Republicans, and we need to get out and vote for Marsha. [applause]
And we're going to defend our borders, and we're going to fight hard on crime. We're not going to let what's happened over the last long period of time—been going on for a long time. We have borders down 40 percent, and it's tough because our economy is doing so well. More people try and get in, so it makes it even tougher.
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
While Republicans are fighting every day for jobs, safety, opportunity, lack of crime. With them, it's crime, open borders. They've been on a mission to resist and obstruct and destroy. And you see that over the last four days. You see it. [booing]
You don't even get it. You'd think they'd like low taxes. You'd think they'd like a strong military. No crime, strong borders. They don't. They don't.
The Democrat Party is radical socialism, Venezuela, and open borders. It's now called, to me, you've never heard this before, the party of crime. The party of crime. That's what it is.
The Democrat Party supports totally--they love them, sanctuary cities, where crime pours in. . . [booing] . . .and they're protected. That unleash violent predators like MS-13 into American communities, leaving innocent Americans at the mercy of--really, by the way, really ruthless animals. Really ruthless animals.
"We want open borders. We want high taxes. We want crime, because basically they're saying crime." So, to have crime, they have high taxes, they have open borders. "Oh, and by the way, we don't want to fund the military."
If you want to protect American communities from really bad, bad crime, then you need to vote Republican. Patrick Morrisey. You've got to vote Republican.
You don't want your 401(k)s being cut in half, and if you vote Democrat, that's what's going to happen. They want to erase our gains and plunge our country into a nightmare of gridlock, poverty, chaos and, frankly, crime, because that's what comes with it. [booing]
And I've said it and I'll say it as many times as you want to hear it, and it's because of their policy: The Democrats are truly the party of crime, because that's what happens. Open borders, that's what happens. [booing]
How about this? The Dems want to raise your taxes. We want to lower your taxes. We don't want crime. Crime's OK for them. They want open borders. How the hell do we not win this thing in a landslide every time? How do you . . . [applause]
They're for crime and high taxes. We're for low taxes and no crime. I don't know. Somehow I don't think I would have been a very good politician on the other side of this equation.
She wants to keep crime out of Minnesota. That sounds like a good platform, right? Tina Smith would rather protect violent criminal aliens than loyal American citizens, which is why Tina Smith, that nobody ever heard of, needs to be voted out of office. She got appointed, I guess.
Mr. Moore. Allegedly, it's for conspiracy from prison, from State prison. You know, it's alleged. But we do believe even if he did commit those crimes, the sentence was overly broad and too strict.

Mr. Moore. Six consecutive life sentences in the most secure prison in the world, also known as "a clean version of hell," for basically an economic crime.

The Democrats want open borders. It means crime. It means drugs. It means human trafficking. And that's what they want. And if they want to run on that, they can run on it.

Last year, 565 people were murdered in Chicago. Since Eddie Johnson has been police chief, more than 1,500 people have been murdered in Chicago, and 13,067 people have been shot. During the first weekend of August 2019, 7 people were murdered and 52 were wounded in 32 shootings in Chicago. And recently, they had 78 shootings over a weekend spree and 3 people killed. And Chicago has the toughest gun laws in the United States. That doesn't seem to be working too well, does it? [Laughter] And a lot of you people know exactly what I mean. But under Johnson's leadership, they certainly don't protect people. Then, you have the case of this wise guy, Jussie Smollett, who beat up himself. [Laughter] And he said MAGA country did it. MAGA country. Okay? He said MAGA—that's a hate crime. That's a hate crime. And it's a scam. It's a real big scam, just like the impeachment of your President is a scam. And then, you look what's going on. Smollett is still trying to get away with it. He would have been better off if he paid his hundred-thousand-dollar bill. [Laughter]

Chicago is, unfortunately, the worst sanctuary city in America. Chicago protects criminals at a level few could even imagine. Last year, in Cook County alone, ICE asked local law enforcement people to: "Please, pretty please, we beg you, we'll do anything necessary to stop crime. We want to stop crime. Please detain 1,162 people. Please." But in each case, the detainer was denied.

Today we're here to report on the outstanding progress we have made to combat violent crime and restore peace and safety to American cities. And most cities are setting records for good crime numbers.

In the years before I took office, outrageous slanders on our police went unanswered and unchallenged from your leaders in Washington. You know that very well. Radical activists freely trafficked in vile and antipolice hostility, and criminals grew only more emboldened as a result. In the 2 years before my election, violent crime increased 8 percent. Murders were up by more than 20 percent and going a lot higher nationwide, the steepest 2-year consecutive increase in over 50 years.

Together, we have taken bold action to reverse the tide in violent crime. Over the last 2 years, the number of murders in America and America's major cities has dropped, unlike here, by more than 10 percent. And if we ever took the Chicago numbers out of our total numbers, the numbers would be incredible. And they already are, even including Chicago.

The nationwide violent crime rate has declined for 2 consecutive years. During this same time, the number of burglaries was reduced by over—think of this—a quarter of a million. So a quarter of a million less burglaries. That's a big number. It also helps that we have the strongest economy in the history of our country. That probably helps. Take a little credit for that. And it was just announced, as I was getting off the plane, that the S&amp;P has hit an alltime high, the highest in the history of our country. And that's not for rich people, that's for everybody. That's for your 401(k)s. Think of that.

Two years ago, we relaunched and revitalized Project Safe Neighborhoods. Now, Federal prosecutors are once again working closely with State and local law enforcement and all of the community leaders to marshal our resources, target crime in the most dangerous areas, and lock up violent offenders.

In coming weeks, Attorney General Barr will announce a new crackdown on violent crime, which I think is so important—targeting gangs and drug traffickers in high crime cities and dangerous rural areas. Let's call it, the "surge." We can come up with lots of names, but we're going to be doing something that's very dramatic, headed up by our great Attorney General. And you're going to see tremendous results very quickly.

And my administration is also addressing the vile acts of mass violence. We've seen some incredible police officers doing some incredible work recently. A few weeks ago, Attorney General Barr sent a letter to all law enforcement agencies announcing that he will lead an effort across the government to use the most proven methods of fighting terrorism and violent crime to "identify, assess, and engage potential mass shooters" before those shooters strike.

To all the law enforcement partners across the Western Hemisphere, thank you for helping shut down the smugglers, traffickers, and coyotes. Who would have ever thought, in this modern age, human traffickers; you think of it as an ancient crime. It's more prevalent today because of the internet—you understand that well—than ever before, all over the world.

In cities such as Philadelphia, Boston, and here in Chicago, we have also seen a growing number of radical politicians and prosecutors who refuse to enforce the law. You've heard about that. For example, local prosecutors have declared that they will not charge certain offenders, including many theft and drug crime offenders. They just won't charge them. This is a fundamental violation of their sworn duty.

The most dangerous and shameful attacks on the rule of law comes from and in the form of sanctuary cities. Sanctuary cities order jails and prisons to release criminal illegal aliens—people that have committed the worst crimes—directly back onto city streets, instead of safely turning them over to Federal immigration authorities and ICE so they can be incarcerated or tried or—what I like to do best is—get them the hell out of our country and bring them home. Let them take care of them.

Out of love for our neighbors, care for our communities, and commitment to our country, we will shield peace-loving, law-abiding Americans from anyone and everyone who would do them harm. We will keep our streets secure, our cities guarded, and our loved ones safe. We will fight violent crime, uphold the peace, enforce the law, and, with God as our witness, we will proudly serve, protect, and defend the citizens of the United States.

The President. Well, I don't know anything about the letter. But certainly, Rudy is one of the great crime fighters in the history of our country. He's certainly probably the best over the last 50 years. He was also the greatest mayor in the history of the city of New York. I think Rudy was truly an outstanding mayor.

As an example, his endorsement of Bloomberg got Bloomberg elected. He wouldn't have even been mayor. But Rudy was the greatest crime fighter. And Rudy is somebody that, frankly, having him on my side was a great honor for me, and it has been a great honor for me.

Rudy Giuliani—Rudy Giuliani did a phenomenal job over a long period of time in fighting crime. And frankly, he's a very legitimate guy, a very straight shooter. I didn't know about a specific letter, but if he wrote a letter, it wouldn't have been a big deal. Rudy was always in—it was very important to Rudy that I be a great President, and that's okay with me. It was very important to a lot of people, because our country was going to hell, and now our country is on a path that we haven't seen in decades and decades. We've never done better.

The President: Yeah, well, it's radical liberal Democrats. Look. New York — Rudy was a great mayor. Rudy was our greatest mayor by far. He did things that were incredible and brought back New York. But it was easier in a way because the police had total respect. There was crime and everything, but the police were the police. When they dumped water a year ago on the policeman's head and he didn't do anything about it, like turn around and slug the guy, when they did that, I don't know if you remember New York's finest, New York's finest, these are great police. You know, I got endorsed by New York's finest one month ago. And it's the first time in the history of New York City that they've endorsed a presidential candidate.
The President: Well, I think it's ridiculous. Sanctuary cities, as you know, I'm very much opposed to sanctuary cities. They breed crime, there's a lot of problems. If we have to, we'll defund. We give tremendous amounts of money to California — California in many ways is out of control, as you know. Obviously the voters agree, otherwise they wouldn't have voted for me.

We are going to drain the swamp of government corruption in Washington, D.C., and we are going to keep our promises -- all of the promises that we made. We are going to massively reduce your taxes. (Applause.) We are going to reduce very substantially rising crime, and support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.)

Well, the Democrats are opposed to those things. He is weak on crime. He is weak on the border. He is weak on the second amendment. But all of a sudden he got strong. And, by the way, in terms of abortion, take a look at his record. Take a look. It's amazing. He has come back. Take a look at his record. Because where his record is, that's where he is going.
Tester even voted no on enhanced vetting for refugees from terror-stricken countries. You believe this one? What's going on with that? The Democrats want open borders, which means lots of crime. We want tough, strong, powerful borders, and we want no crime and we're going to protect ICE. We protect ICE. [applause]
How did we get here? So, if you look at Jon Tester, he signed up for the Democrats' radical immigration agenda, which is "let them come in, and we believe," they say, "in sanctuary cities where they house the criminals and others." We believe in strong borders and no crime, it's very simple. Strong borders. We believe in coming into this country legally. We believe in coming in legally. [applause]
You're voting for me. A vote for any Democrat this November is a vote for massive regulation, massive taxes, and I hate to say it, massive crime, because crime comes with it. [booing]
Democrats want to open borders, which equals massive crime. Republicans want strong border, and we want no crime. We don't want crime. Democrat support sanctuary cities, cities of crime. [applause]
Crime--think of it, crime and high taxes. Now there's only things we won't even get in, but how do you get past those first two things? Crime--that's the democrats, crime and high taxes. And we're doing things about it, folks.
While Republicans are fighting every day for jobs, safety, opportunity, lack of crime. With them, it's crime, open borders. They've been on a mission to resist and obstruct and destroy. And you see that over the last four days. You see it. [booing]
You don't even get it. You'd think they'd like low taxes. You'd think they'd like a strong military. No crime, strong borders. They don't. They don't.
The Democrat Party is radical socialism, Venezuela, and open borders. It's now called, to me, you've never heard this before, the party of crime. The party of crime. That's what it is.
The Democrat Party supports totally--they love them, sanctuary cities, where crime pours in. . . [booing] . . .and they're protected. That unleash violent predators like MS-13 into American communities, leaving innocent Americans at the mercy of--really, by the way, really ruthless animals. Really ruthless animals.
"We want open borders. We want high taxes. We want crime, because basically they're saying crime." So, to have crime, they have high taxes, they have open borders. "Oh, and by the way, we don't want to fund the military."
If you want to protect American communities from really bad, bad crime, then you need to vote Republican. Patrick Morrisey. You've got to vote Republican.
Dismantle law enforcement and eliminate our borders. They want to have nice, open borders, no way. [audience boos]. The Democrats have become the party of crime, they have become the party of crime, think of it. Republicans are the party of law and order, and justice.
Stopping illegal aliens is not just about jobs, it's not just about crime. It's about our nation's security, and that comes first. [applause]
If the Democrats bill ever becomes law, a tidal wave of drugs and crime would pour into our nation like never ever before. [audience boos]
Homeland Security has just confirmed that members of the lawless caravan, the one you've been watching, come from 20 different countries and include among them criminals and gang members convicted of crimes ranging from armed robbery to sexual assault.
The choice in this election could not be more simple, a Republican Congress means more jobs and less crime. A Democrat Congress means more crime and less jobs. That's pretty good, that's nice and simple, doesn't get simpler than that.
These drugs kill more than 70,000 Americans every single year. Last year alone, our brave ICE officers who they want to get rid of by the way, these are tough, great, strong patriots. We need strength, arrested more than 127,000. Think of that, 127,000. . .[applause]. . . aliens. . .[applause]. . .with criminal records. Including those charged or convicted of 48,000 assaults, 12,000 sex crimes, and 1,800 homicides. They want to get rid of them, let's get rid of ICE. What are these people thinking? That's why you have to have Patrick Morrisey and Carol. You have to vote them in on Tuesday. You have to do it. [applause]
They don't want to have these people coming in. They don't want to have--some of these people are just horrible people. You have to see the crimes they've committed.
The choice in this election could not be more simple. A Republican Congress means more jobs and less crime; a Democrat Congress means more crime and less jobs—very simple, right? I like that. Nothing like simplicity.
Greg is great on jobs. He's tough on crime, and he will always support our veterans, our military, our police and our Second Amendment, and Greg's opponent, Kathleen Williams, is a left-wing radical.  [booing] 
Including those charged or convicted are 48,000 assaults, 12,000 sex crimes, and 1,800 homicides. You know, you don't hear that. I'm the only one that tells you the facts. You don't hear that. Yet instead of applauding ICE as great nationally—these are strong people. We're not going to send weak people to take care of MS-13. These are strong people, but they're great patriots. They love our country. The Democrats want to abolish ICE. They want to turn America into a giant sanctuary city for gang members and MS-13 killers if they had their choice, but we're stopping them.
But the choice is simple. A Republican Congress means more jobs and less crime. A Democrat Congress means more crime and less jobs. It's pretty simple. That's cute. We have a number of very special guests with us tonight including a man, don't we love great athletes. I like him.
They want to sign up the illegal immigrants for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and guess what they really want? They want them voting because they believe they'll be voting for Democrats every single time. The Democrats only believe in defending the borders of other countries. They don't believe in defending our country. Open borders, "come on in." means crime. That's what it means.  [booing] 
These drugs killed, last year, over 70,000 Americans. And last year alone, listen to these numbers they're incredible. You know they want to get rid of ICE right? They want to get rid of ICE. Last year alone, ICE officers arrested more than, listen to this, 127,000 criminal aliens. These are people with criminal records. These aren't like - - these are people that have criminal records here and in the countries from which they come. Including those charged or convicted, a 48,000 assaults, 12,000 sex crimes and 100 - - listen to this, 1,800 murders. 1,800 murders. OK. Think of it.
If you want more caravans and more crime, vote Democrat. [booing]
Including those charged or convicted of approximately 48,000 assaults, 12,000 sex crimes, and 1,800 homicides. Other than that, you know, they're very nice people, very nice people. Other than that, they're very fine people. [booing]
Unless they come through legally. If you want more jobs and less crime, than you have to vote Republican. We are honored to be joined today by several, incredible Mississippi Republican leaders and . . . and this one is really a friend of mine for a long time. He just finished the African-American Museum and we went through it a few months ago when it was opening. And he was so proud of it and just the people, everybody loves this guy. He's a special guy, special man, Governor Phil Bryant. So . . . [applause]
Democrats have become the party of caravans and crime. True. Because when you have open borders, you have crime. When you have sanctuary cities, you have crime. Republicans are committed to halting this incursion and defending the sovereign territory of the United States of America. We're very proud of it. [applause]
They're becoming the party of socialism, late-term abortion, open borders, and crime. [booing] This weekend, some Democrats even proposed a measure that would force the release of thousands of criminal illegal aliens—[booing]—including dangerous felons convicted of rape, sex trafficking, violent assault, and even murder, into our country. Can you believe this? [booing]
Their proposal would put a hard cap on the number of illegal aliens that are brave ICE officers, we love our ICE officers—[cheers and applause]—can detain and thus remove, forcing thousands of criminals to be set free into United States communities. I don't think so. Okay. I don't think so. And I want to thank our ICE offices. What they put up is incredible—[applause]—and that includes Border Patrol and that includes law enforcement. Let's face it. Law enforcement, we love them. They keep us safe. In the last two years alone, ICE officers have made 200—listen to these numbers—266,000 arrests of criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of approximately 100,000 assaults, 40,000, 40, 40,000 larcenies, 30,000 sex crimes, 25,000 burglaries, 12,000 vehicle thefts, 11,000 robberies, 4,000 kidnappings, and 4,000 murders—[booing]—murders, murders, killings, murders.
And there's no place better to talk about border security, whether they like it or not, because I've been hearing a lot of things," Oh, the wall didn't make that much of a difference." You know where it made a big difference? Right here in El Paso. [cheers and applause] And I've been watching where they've been trying to say, "Oh, the wall didn't make that much—" Well you take a look at what they did with their past crimes, and how they made them from very serious to much lesser. You take a look at what the real system is. I spoke to people that have been here a long time. They said, "When that wall went up, it's a whole different ball game." Is that a correct statement? [cheers and applause] Whole different ball game.
As we protect our jobs, we are also protecting America's borders. And we are taking on the extremist and they're really radical, radical extremist Democrats who want open borders and crime, because that's what happens. Open borders and crime. [booing] Last month alone more than 76,000 illegal immigrants arrived at our borders to be apprehended. We have to apprehend them. Do you know what a great job -- I mean seriously think of that, 76,000 people, many of which are rough people. Okay, I'm being nice because they [points to media] will criticize me if I'm not. They will say, "How dare he say that!" But we have people that have criminal records. We have a lot of people. We have a lot of problems. We apprehend them. We capture them. Do you know how tough that job is, border patrol? You know how tough? I don't think any of you guys here -- yeah, you would. That guy would like it. There are some people would like it. They love it. They're great American patriots and ICE, these are great American patriots. [cheers and applause]
So, now we are defending our borders for our country and the people of our country. [cheers and applause] In the last two years alone ICE officers--we love ICE--have made, listen to this though, 266,000 arrests of criminal aliens. Who the hell wants to do that? You don't wanna do it, right? You like what you are doing--making cars, right? I like making cars, I think better, too. But they like it. That's what they do. They're great at it. Including those charged or convicted of nearly 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, 4000 kidnappings and 4000 murders.
The Democrat Party has never been further outside of the mainstream. They are being brought so far left you wouldn't like it folks. You wouldn't like it. You won't be happy. Radical Democrats are the party of high taxes, open borders, late-term abortion, crime, hoaxes, and delusions.
Wages are going way up, crime is going way down, and our military is more powerful right now than ever before. [cheers and applause] And when we took over two and a half years ago, our military was in big trouble. It was depleted, you know that. It was depleted, the equipment was old, the planes were old. Ah we have the most beautiful fighter jets in the world being delivered now, every day. Every day.
Fred Keller is a tough man, he's tough on crime. He loves our military, loves our police, he loves our vets and he will always protect patients, and he will always go for, like me, and I say it so strongly because the fake news doesn't want to say it. We will always protect pre-existing conditions, very important.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
Prominent Republicans have stepped forward to disagree with the president on this and Senate Democrats tried to pass a bill that would make it a crime to fail to report interference in an election.
And, this President kept the promise made by four of his predecessors when he moved our embassy to Jerusalem, the capital of the state of Israel. [Cheering.] He promised our veterans, the real-time world-class health care that you earned in the uniform of the United States, and President Donald Trump delivered. We reformed the VA and Veteran's Choice is now the law. And this President has given the men and women of law enforcement the resources and the respect that they deserve every day. [Cheering.] Violent crime is down, and under the President's leadership we're waging an unprecedented fight against opioid abuse and addiction, all across America. And, of course, under President Trump's leadership we made historic investments to secure our southern border. [Cheering.]
And to remedy past injustices, we passed groundbreaking criminal justice reform. [Applause.] We ended the Clinton-era crime policies that unfairly affected the African-American community, so unfair. [Applause.] 
We've created nearly 9,000 Opportunity Zones with Tim Scott, from South Carolina, who's been a great guy. Great guy. He came in with this idea, and now, nobody had anybody idea it was going to work like this. There's never been anything that worked like this. It's incredible what's going with Opportunity Zones—brandnew—which give churches and investors more ways to rebuild distressed communities. And last year, with the help of many faith leaders, I signed groundbreaking criminal justice reform into law. And if you remember, Sleepy Joe Biden—he's the one—he was pushing it. [Laughter] And that was a killer for Hillary Clinton. And I remember, the first time I saw people—real activists—against Hillary, because of her husband and what they did on criminal justice reform, and they did nothing to fix it. What they did, it was terrible: the crime act. What they did was terrible to so many people. And we got criminal justice reform passed with very conservative people and very liberal people. I mean, it was an amazing thing.

We're glad to be joined today by the first person released from prison under the First Step Act, Matthew Charles. Where's Matthew? Thank you, Matthew. That was very unfair what happened to Matthew and many other people—many other people. And we're very tough on crime, but what happened to some people was very unfair. So it's really great that you're here, Matthew, and I hear you're doing phenomenally well.

We have repeatedly asked the Democrats to close these loopholes and to save the lives of young immigrants. I mean, they're too busy interviewing people on the Russian witch hunt, on the hoax. If they spent a little bit less time on the Russian witch hunt—which turned out to be a total phony deal. Actually, they're the ones that committed the crime, as it turned out. If they spent some time on that, they could solve the loophole problem in an hour, they could solve the asylum problem in an hour, and we'd have no problem whatsoever at the border.

They don't want to do it. They want things to look bad, they want open borders. Open borders mean crime, means human trafficking. Human trafficking—mostly women. Okay? Human trafficking. This is like prehistoric—a word like that, "trafficking." Who would think?

But they want to virtually, and you know this, you know this, they want virtual immunity for illegal aliens who have committed horrible crimes and murder. [booing]  Horrible crimes and murder. Republicans believe our cities should be a sanctuary for law abiding Americans, not criminal aliens. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, and they’re the party, frankly, of socialism. [booing]
As we restore our prosperity, we are also restoring public safety. We are fighting to reduce violent crime. You see so much, and over the last 25 years, so much crime. And ensure that every American can live in safety and peace. And yet with all that you see, we’ve had one of the best years of crime prevention that we’ve ever had. It wouldn’t seem that way, but it is one of the best years because those gentlemen that we just saw, the law enforcement, they do a great job. [cheers and applause]
Yet Democrats want to open borders and Republicans want strong borders. That you’re difference. One wants open borders. Who can even think of an open border? Think of it? Even though many people that come into our country are wonderful people, they’re are still coming in illegally. They’re not coming in through merit. But what about the bad ones? We have serious, serious criminals that want to come in, and if we had open borders, they would be flowing in like you’ve never seen before. Democrats want open borders, they don’t mind crime. We do mind crime and that’s the way it is. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion and socialism. [booing]
The charges against these freed criminals include sexual assault, robbery, drug crimes, kidnapping, and homicide. Murder. [shouting] Why would you do it? Why would you do it? What is it? Explain it. Just recently, Mecklenburg County set free an illegal alien charged with first-degree rape and crimes against a child. Support for sanctuary cities is disloyalty to American citizens, and McCready wants sanctuary cities with all of their protections for people that are serious criminals.
Ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth, and if you look at Virginia, the Governor of Virginia, he was even talking about essentially you would say an execution. He was talking after the baby is born, the doctor will talk to the mother and they'll make the decision as to whether or not that baby lives. This is a radical Democrat idea. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. They're socialists. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. Every day they're making good on the motto, "promises made, promises kept." In fact, we are keeping even more promises by far than we made, or than we promised. So many more. So many more. So many more.
The President. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, and socialism. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it is the party of the American dream. [cheers and applause] We've achieved record funding for the US military. All of that money, trillions and trillions of dollars spent, all produced right here in the good old USA. [cheers and applause] And I have to tell you, New Mexico, I know you're gonna like this. A lot of those trillions because you know when you do the 716 and the 730 and the 700 billion, all of a sudden you're in trillions and I can save a lot of lines when I just say trillions. A lot of that money's going to be spent in the state-of-the-art military equipment that's being used at Holloman Air Force Base, White Sands Missile Range—[cheers and applause]—Kirkland Air Force Base, and many other vital New Mexico military installations that are going up as we speak.
As rightly so, because we are not talking about cold numbers or faceless statistics. Socialist dictatorships, such as Maduro, dehumanize. With great pain, we have seen the regime has done to the most vulnerable people in my country. Child prostitution, President, has been normalized. Women are being sold into slavery and taken to other countries for profit, while children and youth have been recruited by terrorist organizations linked to drug trafficking. And our people are crawling through the streets of Venezuela looking for food. The Maduro regime is a corrupt, criminal enterprise that has turned what once was one of the most prosperous countries in the region into a living and dying hell. The world needs to understand that Venezuela is not a dictatorship, not even a failed state. It's something worse. The Maduro regime is a sanctuary for the promotion of terrorism, drug trafficking, and organized crime.

The do-nothing Democrat extremists have gone so far left that they believe it should not be a crime to cross our border illegally, and it should be a crime to have a totally appropriate, casual, beautiful, accurate phone call with a foreign leader. I don't think so. As our brilliant White House counsel wrote to the Democrats yesterday, he said, "Their highly partisan and unconstitutional effort threatens grave and lasting damage to our democratic institutions, to our system of free elections, and to the American people." That's what it is. To the American people. It's so terrible.
The President. A brand new report just came out as I'm walking on the stage. Hard to believe, actually. It turns out that Joe Biden was vice president, he worked with the so-called whistleblower. [booing] This is nothing but a partisan witch hunt, sabotage, and I'm sure they're going to say it's totally unsubstantiated, but one of them wrote this story. Congratulations, by the way. That's very nice. That's really good. That's the way you should do it. Good. Good. Good. In the twisted worldview of Democrats and the media, it's okay for politicians to ship our jobs to foreign countries, flood our communities with drugs and crime, and enrich themselves at America's expense. Their treachery is allowed because they go along with the rigged Washington game, and it is far more rigged. When I ran, I thought it was rigged, but this is crazy what's happening. But if you refuse to bow or bend to the Washington swamp, which I could do very easily, I'd be much more popular. Folks, it would be so much easier. [booing]
You never ever ... Please. Always just assume you're a little behind, but we're going to win this state by so much that people are going to be shocked. And plenty of other states too. You know, we had a rally three weeks ago in New Mexico, and New Mexico's a hard state for Republicans, hasn't been won in a long time also. And we had receptivity that was unbelievable. The audience was 40% Hispanic, where we're doing great. [cheers and applause] And you know, Hispanic, they understand borders better than anybody, better than we do. They understand safety, they understand their job, they don't want people taking it away, they don't want crime. They understand it better. That's why we're doing so well, but we're in New Mexico, and I'm telling you, that was electric. But honestly, all evenings are electric. We haven't had any bad ones. We haven't. They're all electric. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb, right up to the moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant Washington corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and it's the party of the American Dream. [cheers and applause]
The Democrats are fighting to restore the wretched political class that threw open our nation's borders, shipped away our jobs, sacrificed our wealth, surrendered our sovereignty, flooded our cities with drugs and crime and bogged us down in one foreign war after another. The endless wars have to stop. Have to stop. [applause] We're directly taking on the unholy alliance of corrupt Democrat politicians, deep state bureaucrats and the fake news media. There they are right there. [booing] You know, it's really funny, I see all those red lights on. That means, you're live. Right? As soon as I start talking about the fake news, I see those lights go off so fast, but then they come back on. And you know why they come back on because last night, by far, all over the cable, all over the place, the highest rated show was what we did in Minnesota, a state that we're going to win. [applause] That's why they come back on because they had no choice. They may hate Trump, but they want to get those ratings. Hey, what's going to happen in 12, maybe 16 years? When I'm no longer President. See, I'm just driving up here. Their ratings are going to tank. I actually think they're going to endorse me. Because if they don't, can you imagine having Pocahontas as your president? [booing] Now, the real Pocahontas we wouldn't have minded, but the fake Pocahontas you can't have. Or how about sleepy Joe? [booing]
Nervous Nancy. I used to think she loved the country; she hates the country because she wouldn't be doing this to the country if she did. She hates the country; Nancy Pelosi hates the United States of America because she wouldn't be doing this. And I'm telling you, foreign nations, foreign people looking at us. They honestly think we're nuts. And then you have Presidents and saying nothing was wrong. The President of the country. That's in question. But Nancy Pelosi said, "Well, that's what he said. Isn't it?" But she was angry as hell when she got to read the transcript. Because she said, "Wait a minute, that's not what I was told." But she was stuck, she was stuck. But think of a guy, who makes up a phone call, makes up my words, viciously says, eight quid pro quos. In other words, you got to do this and we're not going to do that. And there were none. There were none. They couldn't believe it when I released that call. I would have loved to have seen their faces. And then he goes before the United States Congress and before the American public and he makes up the story of what I said. Made it horrible and vicious, not even close. It's not like, "Gee, he missed a couple of words." He missed every word, he missed every. He made it up, it was fiction. It's unbelievable. And honestly, I don't know Congressman, but are you immune from something like that? That should be a crime. That should be a crime. [applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports, late term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb. [booing] Right up to the moment of birth. That's why, I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [applause] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party–the American worker, the American family and the American dream, that's what they want. Republicans want the American dream. [applause]
Crazy Nancy. Think of that. That crazy Nancy. She is crazy. [booing] And Shifty Schiff. How about this guy? How about this guy? [booing] He makes up my conversation, which was perfect. He makes up my conversation. He sees what I said. It doesn't play well because it was perfect. So he made up a totally false conversation with the Ukrainian president—[booing]—and we caught him cold. Everybody knew it anyway. See, we did one thing. You always have to do the unexpected. They never thought I'd release the conversation with the Ukrainian president. [cheers and applause] I wanna get him before Congress and I wanna see what he has to say. You know, they say he has immunity. Why would you have immunity for outright fraud? Why do you have immunity? Why? He's a fraud. We're fighting a campaign against leftists, socialists, and globalists who wanna return to reckless wars, open borders, rampant crime, and totally disastrous one-way trade deals. We're changing that one around very quickly. [cheers and applause]
The President. But the do-nothing Democrats believe anyone who opposes them has to be crushed. They don't wanna just beat them. They don't wanna just beat them. These are sick people. They wanna crush these people. The anger, the hatred, and that any lie or crime or corruption is justified, so Schiff gets up and makes up my statement. He makes it up 100% and then he said he didn't speak to the whistleblower. No, we didn't see the whistleblower. And what about the whistleblower? The whistleblower got it all wrong. Who's the whistleblower? Who's the whistleblower? Who is the whistleblower? We have to know. Is the whistleblower a spy? And who is the IG that did this? All he had to do is look at the tape or look at what they wrote down, the transcribed version of the phone call. Compare that to the whistleblower's account and you see it had nothing to do with it. So why does the IG allow a thing like this to happen to our country? Why? Why? [shouting]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that crackpot governor from Virginia executes the baby after birth. You saw that, right? After birth. You remember that one from last year. That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [cheers and applause] Democrats are now the party of crazy politicians, high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. They're corrupt, like Schiff is corrupt. He's corrupt. [shouting]
Four days from now, this state will head to the polls and vote to continue our extraordinary progress with your next governor, Republican Tate Reeves. Great guy. Great guy. [cheers and applause] Under Republican leadership, jobs are booming, confidence is soaring, wages are rising, crime is falling, and our nation is stronger than ever before. We're now an economic powerhouse. We've never been in a position like it. We've rebuilt our military and we have financial strength. And by the way, for those of you with a thing called 401(k)s—[cheers and applause]—the stock market hit, today, another all-time historic high. [cheers and applause]
To protect our communities, my administration restricted migration from terror-prone nations and implemented the toughest ever vetting procedures. Toughest ever that we've ever had. No issue has ever been so horribly discarded by a party as that issue by the Democrats. They want open borders, which mean crime. They want sanctuary cities, which means crime and drugs and death. After bleeding the middle class dry, Democrats threw open our borders to the world, flooding our communities with poisonous drugs and criminal cartels. Republicans believe in strong borders and safe communities. We are now building a wall.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream. Nobody has done more for the African-American community than the Republican party. [cheers and applause] And we're also the party of Abraham Lincoln. We can't forget that. People forget. Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Look, he's such a pain, when he needs something for Kentucky like money, like aid, like, he wants me to call one of the many manufacturers now that are coming into Kentucky, "Could you call the head of some company in Japan, please?" I say, "Matt, do I have to do it?" "Please, please." But isn't that really what you want in a governor? [cheers and applause] That's what you want. [cheers and applause] He's such a pain in the ass, but that's what you want. [cheers and applause] And the job he's done, one of the best in the country. Not the best. He's been incredible. Matt is strong on crime and tough on illegal immigration. Thank you. [cheers and applause] He's pro-worker, pro-life, and 100% pro-Second Amendment. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Virtually every top Democrat also now supports late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from their mother's womb, right up until the moment of birth. [booing] And that's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late-term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God. [booing] Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and it's the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. We forgot that. Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] The incredible rebuilding of our military includes over 100 billion-dollar investments all across the state of Kentucky.
The President. So, is there any place you would rather be than at a Trump rally on a beautiful, wonderful evening in Louisiana? [applause] I don't even know. Would you rather be at LSU versus Alabama or a Trump rally? Let's take the Trump rally. [applause] But Democrats must be accountable for their hoaxes and for their crimes. Now, corrupt politicians, Nancy Pelosi and shifty Adam Schiff —[booing]— and the crooked media have launched the deranged, delusional, destructive, and hyper-partisan impeachment witch hunt. [booing] Now, we go again except, a lot of things have happened because, you know, I don't know if you saw, I just got off -- I'm coming off the plane and they hand me, look at this guy right there, OK. They just hand me the story, coup has started, whistleblower's attorney said in 2017. Do you know when that was?
With John Bel Edwards, you will soon have a sanctuary city in your midst —[booing]— but the Democrats -- think of it. They want open borders, which means crime. Now, look at what's going on in Mexico, and I'll tell you what, I have to thank the Mexican government in one way, 27,000 soldiers, but they have other problems. These cartels are a tremendous problem, we're building and we are building a wall. That wall is going up and it's going up. [applause] Our military is now building the wall and it's going up fast. The Army Corps of Engineers and it's going up and it's doing great, it's doing great. It should have been built years ago. That wall should have been built many years ago, never did. They never could figure it out, but I figured it out. It wasn't easy. I had 100% of the other party fighting me. 100%. Do you think that's easy? And you know, we had a majority of a few people, very little, very little. We needed Democrat votes, but we had 100% of the people, and I made one mistake.
Eddie is tough on crime, strong on borders, and he'll work with ICE and Border Patrol to get violent criminals off the streets. We'll bring them back to their country ideally or we'll put them in jail where they belong. [applause] Eddie is pro-energy, pro-family, pro-life, and pro-Second Amendment totally. [applause] Eddie will defend your values from the all-out assault by the extreme left. That's what they are. They're the extreme left. I call them AOC-plus-three. AOC, that's a real beauty. You only have eleven years to live, folks, eleven years, because climate change is just coming up on us so fast. You know, it's 12 years but today, I heard one of these crazies say, it's down to eleven, and they arrested Jane Fonda. Nothing changes. I remember 30, 40 years ago. They're -- she always has the handcuffs on. Oh man, she's waving to everybody with the handcuffs. I can't believe it. They -- remember that? She went to Vietnam to find out how nice they were. They weren't too nice to her by the way. No, they arrested her today, Jane Fonda, nothing changes. They arrest every, every, 25 years, they arrest her.
Edwards is totally owned by the Liberal trial lawyers, who are causing your state insurance rates and car insurance to skyrocket through the roof. Perhaps, most disturbing, Edwards has allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of dollars and healthcare from hardworking Louisiana citizens. [booing] He cares more about illegal aliens than he cares about Louisiana citizens. I'll tell what, I love our military, Eddie loves our military. [applause] They care more about illegal aliens than taking care of our vets and taking care of our military. Edwards is dangerously soft on crime, you know that.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. It's also the party of the late great Abraham Lincoln, people forget. We have confirmed already 158 incredible judges to interpret the Constitution as written, including two great Supreme Court Justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. [applause]
Since the election, real wages have gone up 3.2 percent for the median American worker. But for the bottom income group, real wages are soaring—a number that's never happened before—9 percent. And that means you might make a couple of bucks less in your companies. You know what? That's okay. That's okay. This is a great thing for our country when you talk about equality. This is a great thing for our country. Our tight labor market is helping them the most. Yet Democrats in Washington want to erase these gains through an extreme policy of open borders, flooding the labor market, and driving down incomes for the poorest Americans and driving crime right through the roof. They want nothing to do with looking at the people that are coming in. And some very, very bad people are trying to get in.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. They're corrupt. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
But Americans have so much to be thankful for the economy is booming, wages are rising, crime is falling, poverty is plummeting, confidence is soaring and America is Stronger than ever before—[cheers and applause]—we've created six point seven million new jobs, including 600,000 jobs right here in the great state of Florida—[applause]—we're protecting American workers taking care of our amazing veterans--by the way you know the veterans for years and years and years I was like you I was a civilian, I love my life, my life was so much simpler. [laughter]
But the lies of the Democrats are being exposed. Their schemes are unraveling--their crimes--and that's what it is, crimes. Did you ever hear this guy corrupt politician, Schiff? He made up my statement—[booing]—to the Ukrainian President. He made it up. These are crooked people, but their crimes are being revealed and their sinister plans are failing at a level that nobody thought even me possible [applause].
That's why I've asked Congress to prohibit extreme late term abortion, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift from God [cheers and applause]. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism and blatant corruption. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream and remember this the Republican Party is the party of Abraham Lincoln. We forget. Abraham Lincoln, and I've always heard that the most important thing a President can do is the appointment of judges. I say maybe the military, because without the military we're not so interested in judges, right. So, I think maybe the military, but we've done a great job with that totally rebuild.
And now after two and a half years, now that the Russia witch hunt is dead, a big fat disgusting fraud, the Congressional Democrats are pushing the impeachment witch hunt having to do with Ukraine—[booing]—but that's already failing. You saw their so-called articles of impeachment today, people are saying they're not even a crime. What happened? All of these horrible things, remember? Bribery and this and that. Where are they? They send these two things, their not even a crime. This is the lightest, weakest impeachment--our country has had actually many impeachments, you recall judges and lots of--many impeachments, but it was on today, everybody said, "This is impeachment light." This is the lightest impeachment in the history of our country by far. It's not even like an impeachment. These people are stone cold crooked. When a guy like shifty Schiff, he's a corrupt politician—[booing]—he made up my statement because--see, I did one thing very good, as soon as I heard about this deal, I released my statement immediately, but he had already made horrible statements. And by the way, the whistleblower, the whistleblower defrauded our country because the whistleblower wrote something that was totally untrue and we broke up the game. Remember the second whistleblower was coming, right? And then the informer, who is the informer? I know who the informer is. So, the informer obviously gave him a false information because they wrote in the whistleblower report, they wrote something totally different from what I said, what I said was perfect. But it screwed up the whole works because most guys would never do that. They didn't even know probably that we had it transcribed, professionally transcribed, word for word transcribed, so beautiful. Am I lucky I had it transcribed? Think of that. Think of that.
But today, the House Democrats announced these two flimsy, pathetic, ridiculous articles of impeachment. The House Democrats are walking back from everything they claimed. With today's announcement, they're now admitting there was no collusion, there was no obstruction of justice, and there were no crimes whatsoever. There are no crimes. It says it, there are no crimes. They're impeaching me and there are no crimes. This has to be a first in history. They're impeaching me. You know why? Because they want to win an election. And that's the only way they can do it.
So, the Democrats have nothing, and they've turned the somber process of impeachment. And it was, you know, to me, impeachment is a very ugly word. It's a word I associate with some very bad times in our country. The good news is we're having the best times in history in our country. [applause] Okay? But the word impeachment, to me, is a very, very ugly word. It's a dark, ugly word. But, but I have to tell you, as bad as it is, it meant something. When you had serious high crimes and misdemeanors, when you had serious, go ahead, it's impeachment. That would happen every 50 years, every 40 years, every 100 years. This was a big deal. They're making it so like, "Let's do it every six months." They've cheapened a process. They've cheapened a process. These people are so bad, the radical left Democrats, and I actually think that Pelosi, who by the way, by the way—[booing]—by the way, she has totally lost control. She has totally--it's being run now by this crazy AOC plus three. AOC plus three. Now it's being run by other people. The far left has, has just grabbed that party. It is so sad to see. And she knew what would happen. I didn't, because I didn't figure the polls would go through the roof. They went out today. In Michigan, in Wisconsin, in a place called Pennsylvania. No, no. The polls are through the roof. They're called swing states, very important states. We won Pennsylvania the last time, and we're going to win it again, but even bigger. [applause]
Democrats' sanctuary cities also give safe haven to those who commit violent sex crimes. Since Montgomery County, Maryland declared itself a sanctuary jurisdiction in July, we have already identified nine illegal aliens who have been arrested for rape, sexual assault, including a 26-year-old man charged with raping and viciously strangling a young, wonderful woman who was entering her apartment, innocently entering her apartment. She was raped and killed, strangled to death. Sanctuary city. Maryland. But these are only the cases we know about. Sanctuary cities and jails actively conceal illegal alien crime and criminals from federal government. Federal government wants to take them out, or in some cases, if it's real violence, and we don't want to pay for the cost, but we do, put them into very strong jails. The sanctuary city of Philadelphia. The sanctuary city in Philadelphia—[booing]—is one of the very worst sanctuaries anywhere in America. Did you know that? I mean, I know Philadelphia well. Going to school here, we never heard about sanctuary cities, did we?
You better get yourself a new prosecutor in this place, I want to tell you. That's a horrible thing. No, it's a national story, how he wants everybody to not pay the price. And you're talking about not paying the price for rape, for murder, for other horrible crimes. How stupid--how stupid can you be? The charges against this alien include rape, aggravated indecent assault, unlawful contact with a minor, indecent exposure, and terroristic threats. Other than that, he was a very nice person. Philadelphia has defied ICE and released illegals charged with everything from assault, to kidnapping, to drug crimes, to sex crimes, to homicide murder.
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law and order, and we stand for justice. We stand for justice. [applause] We side with law enforcement and with law-abiding Americans, not ruthless gang members and not violent criminals, aliens that come into our country illegally. They take our payments. Payments. Some of these people with these crazy laws that you have. Look at what's going on in California. They do better than our great veterans. They do better than citizens of our country. And they advertise, "We will take you. We will take care of you. We will pay for it." And then you wonder why we have so many people trying to come through at the borders. But we do a great job. We're removing these criminal illegal aliens from our country by the thousands. We're sending them home, and we're not letting them come back in. We're being very tough. [applause] And Mexico is now giving us 27,000 soldiers at our border. And Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, we signed a very important agreement with each. When their people come into our country, they weren't taking them back. Now they take them back and they say, "Thank you very much." They weren't taking them back. If we had a murderer from Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, we want to bring them back under past administrations. They bring them and they say, "We don't want them. Don't land your plane with us." They say, "Thank you very much. We will take them back." Because we've let them know the price is very bad if they don't do that.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the party of honest Abe Lincoln. [applause] Party of Abe Lincoln.
So, I said in my letter to Pelosi--I love that. You know, usually there's one, two. The Republicans, look, I've said it for a long time. The Democrats are lousy politicians, they really are. They've got horrible policies, open borders, crime is fine, drugs pouring through. I mean, think of what they do. Sanctuary cities, they love sanctuary cities, you know. They're lousy politicians, but they have one thing--two things. They are vicious. They're the most vicious people. The Republicans aren't as vicious. They may learn to be vicious after going through this, though. But the other thing, the Democrats always stick together. Now think of it, three Democrats went over to our side, no Republicans. It's unheard of. [applause]
But what they've done with this perversion, it's perversion. And when you watch some of these people get up and speak today, they don't even, "You have violated the Constitution." "Well, what does he done wrong?" "Well, we don't know that." They don't even have any crime. This is the first impeachment where there's no crime. I say, "Tell me what I did, please." "Well, we don't know. You violated the Constitution." You had Turley, who's smart, Alan Dershowitz, these guys. All of them, they said, "There's no crime. There's no crime," right? There's no crime! I'm the first person that ever get impeached, and there's no crime. I feel guilty. You know what they call it? Impeachment light. It's impeachment light. That's why, you know with Richard Nixon, I just see it as a very dark era, very dark, very--oh, you don't even like to think. I don't know about you, but I'm having a good time, it's crazy. [applause] But I also know we have a great group of people behind us in the Republican Party, we really do. Maybe I wouldn't feel the same way, but we have a great group of people behind us. We had in the House, and we have it in the Senate. They're doing a great job, so I'm not worried. I'm not worried, because it's always good when you don't do anything wrong, you get impeached. That may be a record that will last forever. But you know what they have done? They've cheapened the impeachment process. And now anybody that become--this is a sacred position. Anybody that becomes president, I mean, they could have a phone call and they get impeached. So, if the Republicans--if you had a Democrat as president, we have a Republican house, they don't like the guy for whatever reason, or the woman, they impeach the person. It's cheapened it. It's exactly what our founding fathers didn't want, and they said it could happen, and it's happened.
In June, two illegal aliens in Sandusky, Michigan were convicted of sadistically beating and stabbing a woman to death with a kitchen knife. Then, they hid her body in a water drain. A criminal alien with two previous deportations was just arrested in Michigan and convicted of brutally beating and strangling to death, a single mother of five young children. It's happening all the time. Far left politicians support deadly sanctuary cities, which deliberately release dangerous, violent criminal aliens out of the jails and directly onto your streets. You know we had a great election in North Carolina recently, two great congressmen got elected, you don't hear about it, when they win, you don't ever hear about it, just a few months ago. Two great people and they got elected and they got elected because I went in at the end and said, "You don't talk about the fact that you have sanctuary cities" and they had some horrible crimes happening from those sanctuary cities. Soon as I mentioned that boom, they went up like rocket ships and they won their elections, and it was great. Great thing.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. And that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. And that's really what it is. We're also the party of the great Abraham Lincoln. A lot of people forget that, but we have to bring it up. To protect the health and safety of our citizens, we awarded $100 million to improve water infrastructure in Flint. How badly was Flint? Who was, who were the geniuses that did that to you? You have clean water coming into Flint. They had to pay a very tiny little fee. So, instead, they go into this horrible, horrible, really polluted water and the water comes out of there. They spend hundreds of millions of dollars to save like a couple of bucks, and the water was so terrible, and it hurt the people. It hurt the people. But we're getting it fixed. And I know your previous governor was a Republican, but I was not a big fan of his. I was not, but I'm not a big fan of the one that can't fix the potholes either.
And yet, now I see the radical left Democrats have expressed outrage over the termination—[booing]—of this horrible terrorist. [booing] And you know, instead they should be outraged by Soleimani's savage crimes and the fact that his countless victims were denied justice for so long. You know, he was the king of the roadside bomb. You know of the roadside bomb, and then they got bigger, and he'd send them over to Afghanistan and Iraq. And when you see our friends and our great wounded warriors and our great warriors, when you see them without their legs, or without an arm, and with so much damage, it's most likely that he caused that damage, because that's what he liked. He loved planting the roadside bomb. So now he's gone, and that's a good thing. [cheers and applause]
The President. Far-left radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities and demonstrated their contempt, scorn, and disdain for everyday Americans and the American family. These jurisdictions release dangerous violent criminal aliens out of their jails and directly onto your streets where they are free to rob, attack, and kill American citizens, but we stop it. They want open borders. Can you believe it? And because of Democrats' open border policies, they want open borders. They want people flowing. Come on in. Come on in. Innocent Americans are being brutalized and murdered by illegal alien criminals. As just one example right here in Ohio, you all know about it, an illegal alien went on a deadly crime spree, attempting to rape a 14-year-old girl. Then raping and murdering a 60-year-old woman. Then shooting another woman who took a shortcut through the park and was walking with her children. And finally the police came. We love our police. And they were able to apprehend this terrible criminal.
But Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice. That's really the way it is. [cheers and applause] We side with law enforcement, with law-abiding Americans, not law-breaking criminal aliens. We are removing these illegal criminals and gang members from our country by the thousands. We are sending them home. And we will not let them back in. And I have to tell you, a lot of things are happening. You're gonna hear about that in two seconds. Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, illegal crossings are down 75% since May. [cheers and applause] We have ended catch and release. Catch and release, you know what catch and release is? We catch them. We take down their name and we release them. What kind of crap is that? [shouting] These are the policies that we inherited. You catch somebody, you take their name. Say "Please come back in three years." Right? And we release them into our country. And if you don't do that everybody gets sued. Can you believe this? We have ended catch and release.
But they wanna have open borders. They wanna have sanctuary cities. The radical Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. They are stone cold crazy. [shouting] You know, it's interesting, as I'm saying this stuff. You know, they want crime, they want chaos. I'm saying all this stuff and then I say, "Gee, now I sort of understand why they hate me." Right? But it's true. It's true. Their policies are a disaster. They're bad politicians and they have horrible policies but what they do is they stick together and then they're vicious. They're vicious, horrible people. I didn't use to say that. They're horrible people. What they do to people is a disgrace but they stick together.
Radical Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the party of the American dream. We still have that American dream. [cheers and applause]
And the Democrats should be outraged by Soleimani's evil crimes, not the decision to end his wretched life. They're saying, "Well, he was a General. He was this. He was that." You know what? Number one, he wasn't supposed to be there. He was a designated terrorist—by President Obama who didn't do anything about it, as usual. [booing] As usual. They don't do anything. They designate ,and they don't do anything about. He should've been killed 20 years ago. [applause]
Last year, ICE—I love ICE. I think they're so great. [cheers and applause] You know, they moved thousands of MS-13 out of our country. Thousands, and others too. But ICE officers in this region of our country arrested nearly 7,000 illegal aliens with criminal records. So,you have 7,000 illegal aliens having criminal records, including those charged or convicted of murder, burglary, robbery, drug crimes, killings in the most violent way. Right here in Wisconsin, cities run by far-left politicians are releasing dangerous criminal aliens who abuse, assault and threaten innocent children. Your children. [booing]
Democrats stand for crime, corruption and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order and justice. It's true. It's true. [cheers and applause] We believe Wisconsin should be a sanctuary for law-abiding Americans, not for criminal aliens. [applause] We are removing these illegal criminals and gang members by the tens of thousands, and we will not let them back. And we made a deal with Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Mexico, where they accept them back. Under the Obama administration, they get 'em, they'd bring 'em back. And Honduras and Guatemala, would say "get the hell—we're not taking them back." But with us, they take 'em back. They take 'em back. [applause] Very great.
But on no issue have Washington Democrats thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of immigration. [shouting] Left-wing, radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities—[booing]—and remember, a sanctuary city is a jurisdiction that refuses to hand over criminal aliens that are in local law enforcement custody. Instead, they order them to be released into your community. What the hell is going on? [booing] What is going on? And once set loose, these criminal aliens are free to continue their crime spree against innocent Americans. Right here in New Jersey, your state's Democrat leaders have instituted sanctuary policies that result in dangerous predators being set free into your community. [booing]
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice, and say what you want, but those are the facts. [cheers and applause] And we are removing these illegal criminals and gang members. We are literally taking them by so many, thousands and thousands, and we're bringing them back. And thanks to our tireless efforts of border patrol to secure our border, we have reduced illegal border crossings seven straight months in a row. We have the numbers down by 75% since spring, 75%. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. Look at what's happening to their cities. Los Angeles, it's so sad. What you see is so sad with the homeless and the way they don't take care of the homeless. San Francisco, you could take a ... Starting in New York. You could take a look at what's happening to our cities run by Democrats. It's a disaster. They don't know what the hell they're doing. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, and the American dream. [cheers and applause]
In this region of the county alone, last year, ICE officers arrested nearly 4,000 illegal aliens charged or convicted of heinous crimes, including robbery, rape, and murder.
Democrats stand for crime, corruption, and chaos. Republicans stand for law, order, and justice. It's true. [cheers and applause] We are finding the illegal game members, drug dealers, predators, and we are throwing them the hell out of our country, ideally. And we don't wanna put them in prison because you know what? We gotta pay for them for the next 50 years, but sometimes we have to. If they're too dangerous we have no choice.
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. No matter how you cut it, that's what it is. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. You know that, right? Abraham Lincoln. Honest Abe.
Anyway, Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. It's true. And our numbers with African-American workers, people, are through the roof. Are through the roof because-- [cheers and applause] Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose?" I'd read the down the worst on crime, the worst on education. They got this, they got that, they got 10 different things, all horrible. And one day I'm in front of this tremendous group of people and I'm reading this list, African-American, they have the highest crime rate, they have the highest this, they have the worst education, they have the worst schools, they have the worst-- I said, "Stay with me," because they were with the Democrats for a hundred years, more. I said, "Stay with me. What the hell do you have to lose?"
Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late term abortion, socialism, and blatant corruption. The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? Abraham Lincoln. [applause]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total destruction of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, the Second Amendment, and the late great Abraham Lincoln, right? [cheers and applause] Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background, every community, and every walk of life. We are the party of boundless optimism, excitement, energy, and enthusiasm. We have tremendous energy. Tremendous energy. [cheers and applause]
The President. He's agreeing. No more censorship is right. No more evil. No more crimes. You're right. From Yuma to Mesa, and from Flagstaff to right here in Phoenix—[cheers and applause]—we stand on the shoulders of red-blooded American patriots who poured their heart, sweat, and soul to secure our liberty and to defend our freedom. Arizona was founded by pioneers and prospectors, great prospectors, cowboys and miners and ranchers who tamed the wilderness, braved the blazing sun, and it is hot here. I've been here during the summer. I wanna tell you, it's seriously hot. [laughter] Of course, didn't they say that President Clinton, when he went on the back of the plane, was here to play golf, it was 121 degrees that day? I don't know about that. I don't know about that. What do you think he was doing with the Attorney General? I remember he said, "Oh, I just happened to see she was— I was here to play golf. It was 120 degrees out." I don't know.
In Denver, an illegal alien was recently charged with brutally stabbing a judge multiple times, attempting to murder him his own home. The alien had been arrested 36 times over the past 20 years. Other than that, other than that, he was a very fine fellow, for crimes including assault and child abuse, yet somehow they kept letting him go and he was still in our country. In communities across the nation, radical, and we're watching them very closely, left-wing politicians are imposing deadly sanctuary cities, and sanctuary states, and policies that compel local law enforcement to release these illegal aliens straight into your beautiful communities. [booing] Last year, Colorado Democrats enacted a law declaring this entire state to be a sanctuary for dangerous criminal aliens. [booing]
The Democrat party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. That's what it is. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause] People forget that. People forget Honest Abe. He's the most presidential guy, right? I've always said I could be more presidential than anybody, but I'm not sure I can beat Honest Abe when he wears the hat. That hat is too much. It's so easy to be presidential, so easy. It's so much easier than doing what I have to do, but you know what I'd have? I'd have about three people in the front row. [laughter]
We catch them, and we take some information and we release them in, and we say, "Please report back in four years from now for your trial." And about 2% come back, and they're the ones that are the dumbest people I've ever seen. [laughter] 2%. Nobody comes back. It's crazy, but we're getting a change. It would be so easy. They call it loopholes. Loopholes. That word alone, they call it loopholes. It would be so easy if we had some Democrat support. We don't have any Democrat support. They want open borders. They don't care about crime. Border Patrol has seized the largest amount of deadly narcotics ever in the history of our country this last year. We have deported record numbers of gang members. We are building the wall faster than ever, and we will soon be building more than one mile a day. [cheers and applause]
We're pursuing new advances in neonatal research to care for America's youngest patients and breaking all records in so doing. Virtually every Democrat candidate has declared their unlimited support for extreme late-term abortion, ripping babies straight from the mother's womb right up until the very moment of birth. That is why I've asked Congress to prohibit late-term abortion of babies, because Republicans believe that every child is a sacred gift of God. [cheers and applause] The Democrat Party is the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. The Republican Party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and of course the late, great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
Last year alone, sanctuary jurisdictions in North Carolina ... How did that happen to North Carolina? Deliberately set free hundreds and hundreds of dan-... And these are really dangerous criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of burglary, gun crime, sexual assault, kidnapping, and even murder. Gotta change it. [shouting] Your Democrat Governor, Roy Cooper, vetoed a bill that would save North Carolina lives and ban sanctuary cities in your state. [booing] What is he thinking? But while your super-liberal governor is putting your families at risk, your Republican Senator Thom Tillis has introduced a bill allowing American victims to sue sanctuary cities for the horrible pain, anguish, and suffering they inflict on our people. [cheers and applause]
The Democratic party is the party of high taxes, high crime, unlimited regulations, open borders, late-term abortion, socialism, blatant corruption, and the total obliteration of your Second Amendment. [booing] The Republican party is the party of the American worker, the American family, the American dream, and the late great Abraham Lincoln. [cheers and applause]
Under this directive, the Secretary of Health and Human Services is authorized to designate essential health and medical supplies as scarce. So he'll designate certain supplies and medical elements as scarce, and that means it will be a crime to stockpile these items in excessive quantities, which is happening to a relatively small degree, we think, but nevertheless, it's happening. We can't let it happen. And we can't let them resell them at excessive prices, which some people are doing.

Joe Biden and the Democrats wanna prosecute Americans for going to church, but not for burning a church. [booing] They believe you can riot, vandalize, and destroy, but you cannot attend a peaceful pro-America rally. [booing] They wanna punish your thought, but not their violent crimes. They wanna abolish bail, abolish and open up your borders. They want open borders, let everyone, and by the way, we're doing so well. We have a record this month on the borders. Nobody's coming in. Very few people. [cheers and applause] And they wanna abolish ICE, our great people from ICE who send the roughest, toughest, meanest people that you've ever seen or ever heard.
We will forever remember and honor the courageous people who helped build this state and this country. Democrats are stoking division in order to distract from their decades of failure on schools, jobs, housing, justice, and crime. In major city public schools run by Democrats, over two thirds of students are falling behind in reading and math. And I think the numbers are worse than that. But Democrats would rather deny these children the future they deserve than allow them to attend the charter, public, private, religious, or independent schools of their choice. Pro-choice, pro-choice. [cheers and applause] Pro-choice for schools. It's very popular, but some people it's, like, a disaster because what it does to certain unions that have a lot of power over the Democrats, even though they know it's wrong.
Republicans believe access to education is a civil right. It's a civil right. [cheers and applause] Twenty of 20 of the most dangerous cities in America are controlled by Democrats. Think of that, 20 of 20. And so is nearly every major city with a child poverty rate that's over 30%. They're controlled by Democrats. We can name every one of them. The murder rate in Baltimore and Detroit is higher than El Salvador, Guatemala, or even Afghanistan. How they doing, the Democrats running those cities? Your whole country will be like that. In 2018 alone, our police arrested nearly 12,000 people for murder and manslaughter, 25,000 people for rape, and nearly 1.5 million for assault, violent assault. The Democrats' push against our police will drive up crime and drive up costs at levels you'd never believe. Thousands of innocent lives will be lost. As president, I will always support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. [cheers and applause]
But this is a political witch hunt. It just continues. It's been from before I got here, when Obama and Biden and everybody else was spying on my campaign illegally. They were illegally spying on my campaign. And that's a very grave crime. It's the biggest political crime in the history of our country.

But we can't let this happen to the cities. New York was up 348 percent, the crime rate. So the Governor has to do something about it. And if the Governor is not going to do something about, we'll do something about it.

Many of your supporters feel that the reason that Obama's former NSA, Susan Rice, is at the top of Biden's list is that she can best cover up a lot of the Obamagate surveillance crimes that have taken place during your campaign.
This was a setup like we've never seen. I think it's the political crime of the century, and they've been caught. So let's see what happens to them all.
In 78 days, we're going to be. 78 days. We're going to win this state. We're going to take back the White House and we're going to have an election that's all about the survival, our nation. This is a very important, in my opinion, I used to say 2016. And I must tell you, I think this is going to be the most important election in the history of our country. This is a very, very big deal going on. Joe Biden is the puppet of left-wing extremists, trying to erase our borders, eliminate our police, indoctrinate our children, vilify our heroes, take away our energy. You know all about that. Take away our energy. If you can believe it. No fossil fuel. Destroy our second amendment, attack the right to life and replace American freedom with left wing fascism. Left wing. We're going to left wing all the way. Fascists. They are fascists. Some of them, not all of them, but some of them, but they're getting closer and closer. We have to win this election, but the proud people of Minnesota will not let this happen. You will deliver a historic victory for our values, our citizens and our treasured way of life. We'll save our cities and our suburbs from the future of crime and chaos, corruption, and economic collapse that puppet Joe Biden would unleash on America. This is a puppet. He won't do it intentionally. He just says, "Well, whatever they want." Because he has no clue. He has no clue.
In recent weeks, Democrat-controlled cities have shown the Democrats' plan and what they plan for America. In Minneapolis, 700 buildings were burned, damaged, or destroyed, costing more than $1 billion. I just left incredible people. We were on a runway like this, and I introduced them. Their businesses were burned down, gone, and they don't know what they're going to do, but we're going to try helping them to get them rebuilt. But five groups of people that were just incredible people, successful, wonderful people, their stores and businesses were burned down, destroyed. Dozens of business owners have announced they are considering moving hundreds of jobs out of Democrat run Minneapolis, you know that. You know that. Criminals are terrorizing civilians in Chicago, Portland, and now New York City. This radical left Mayor de Blasio has let our beautiful diamond, I loved it, I left it four years ago. I could see there were the seeds of problems. He was there, but I left it and it was wonderful. Four years ago, I left it, and over the last year, especially over the last six months, crime has gone up hundreds of percentage points, hundreds. 273 points, 368 points. Numbers that you wouldn't believe. And we're talking about shootings, murders, you saw what happened this weekend. You saw that Jason. Terrible. My city, I love that city, but it has great potential and we're going to do something. We're going to do something strong. They just let it go to hell and I don't know is it because they're bad people or they have no common sense, or they just don't know what they're doing? But our beautiful diamond, of this country, has been let go to hell.
In Joe Biden's America, the protections of American citizenship will be stripped away, and your community will be left at the mercy of the mob. I mean I'm saying these things, but I mean them. When I look at what happened in Minneapolis, when you look at what's going on in different cities that are just unbelievable cities. Remember this though, most of the country is very safe. In fact, crime stats, outside of Chicago, New York, a couple of the crime stats are a record low. Our country's–even during the pandemic we're doing well, but where they're run by the Liberal Democrats, we're not doing well. And we have to get in. You know they have to ask us. We had to be asked here. They have to ask us unless we take a very severe action which ideally you don't want to take. But every time we go in, we solve the problem, and we solve it very quickly. Seattle, look at what's going on with Seattle. I mean this is a city. This is a real city, and they took over a large portion of that city and they knew we were going in the following day. They knew it. So, they sent their police in and it was like nobody ever gave up so easily as those characters. But they're radical left anarchists. Whether you're registered as a Democrat, Independent, or Republican, I'm asking for the vote of every American who believes that police officers are not enemies, but heroes who keep us safe. [cheers and applause]
Over the next four years, we're going to implement an aggressive strategy to fight violent crime. It's already been implemented, and we'll expand the surge of federal law enforcement into crime plagued cities and we can do that at will. We just have to hear from your governor. Call up, just let us know, we'll be there. We are ready, willing, and able. We will hire more tough violent crime prosecutors. We will hire more police. We will dismantle violent left-wing extremist groups like Antifa–they don't even want to say the name Antifa. The don't even want to say the name. And we will pass new laws to prosecute drive-by shootings and an act of domestic terrorism, they will suffer gravely. We will fight for a nation in which every American child is safe on our streets. In which every American family is secure in their homes, and in which all of the American people are confident in our destiny. But to achieve this vision, we must finish the job and drain the Washington swamp once and for all. [applause]
For decades, Washington politicians like Biden allowed an endless supply of illegal foreign labor to decimate American jobs and wages. Also, the crime was incredible what happened. They allowed criminal gangs to menace, maim and terrorize innocent citizens. They came in. They would maim and terrorize, and we have done something with our border patrol. And by the way, ICE, ICE is great. ICE has taken out thousands and thousands of MS-13, and you don't want the job. There's some tough people here. None of you want the job. It's a tough job, but they like it, and they're great Patriots, and they've done a fantastic job. They ceded control of the border to the most dangerous and ruthless cartels on earth. This is what would happen. They have ceded. And what we've done, did you ever notice the caravans? What happened? Debbie, there are no more caravans. What happened? What happened to the caravans? They don't come up anymore. The caravans don't come up. You know, we were paying hundreds of millions of dollars to Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, hundreds of millions. And I said, "Well, why are we doing that?" And they wouldn't take. When we caught a murderer and we wanted to bring it back to one of those countries, they wouldn't take him. And they wouldn't take him under the Obama administration. So, we got stuck with them because they'd fly in. They'd say, "Don't land your plane." And I said something very simple. I said, "That's okay. We don't have to do that. We're not going to pay you anymore. We stopped payment." [applause] We stopped payment.
And you know nobody understands the border better than Hispanics. They know what's good, what's bad. They don't want bad people coming into our country, taking their jobs, taking their homes, causing crime. Hispanic Americans are the people that are most in favor of what we're doing on the border because they understand it. They understand it better than anybody. With the help of these patriots, we've stopped the rampant asylum fraud, shut down the human smugglers and we're finding the drug dealers, traffickers, predators, and we're throwing them the hell in jail or sending them back home. [applause]
They said we lost Debbie, because we lost the first two, but we won in the Supreme court, so they said, "They lost." I guess, technically they're right, we lost when it didn't matter. But we have it. We have a great travel ban now for countries that are not countries where we don't want the people coming in. Over the last three years, ICE officers have made over 380,000 arrests of aliens with criminal records, including those charged or convicted of over 145,000 assaults, 40,000 sex crimes and 5,800 murders. [applause] Over the last three years, border patrol and ICE have seized over two million pounds of fentanyl, heroin, meth, and other deadly narcotics. And you see it all the time.
They want to abolish cash bail, releasing 400,000 criminals onto our streets. Think of no–no more cash bail. Look at what happened in New York. Cuomo ended cash bail. Cuomo. That wasn't even DeBlasio that did it. It was Cuomo, the governor. He ended it in New York, and now the crime rate has gone through the roof. A speaker at Biden's convention, proudly declared, we're talking about abolishing the police. We're talking about abolishing ICE, and we're talking about abolishing prisons. And that's, the only thing they're not abolishing are taxes because your taxes are going to go up at a level that you've never even heard of before.
If you want jobs and you want a lot of police and you want a lack of crime, if you take away New York and Chicago and some of these terrible cities that you see about with the crime, the crime is so bad. I left New York four years ago, and I could see, because he's a terrible mayor, I could see there were things that were happening that were bad. He's no Rudy Giuliani, I can tell you that. But I could see things were happening. But the last six months, seven months, it just exploded. It's incredible. Crime up 368%, 368%. It's crazy. It's crazy.
If they were allowed to do their job. You'd have no crime in New York. Rudy Giuliani knows that better than anybody. Thank you, Rudy.
We must always have law and order. All federal crimes are being investigated, prosecuted and punished to the fullest extent of the law. When the anarchists started ripping down our statues and monuments, right outside, I signed an order immediately. 10 years in prison, and it was a miracle, it all stopped. No more statues. [laughter]
Last year over 1,000 African-Americans were murdered as a result of violent crime in just four Democrat-run cities. The top 10 most dangerous cities in the country are run by Democrats and have been for many decades. Thousands more African-Americans are victim and victims of violent crime in these communities.
We will continue to reduce taxes and regulations at levels not seen before. We will create 10 million jobs in the next ten months, and it will be higher than that. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, and surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. We will ban deadly sanctuary cities and ensure that federal healthcare is protected for American citizens, not for illegal aliens.
We did it in Seattle. We told them, "We're coming in. You either end it or were coming in." Congressmen, we were going in the next day. We were all set. I was actually disappointed, to be honest. [laughter] They ended it in Seattle. They took over 20% of the city. Do you believe this? And the mayor said, "No, it's gonna be a summer of love." These people are crazy. [laughter] So we end them very quickly. We end them very quickly. And now what we're doing is we're holding back funds for cities that don't know what they're doing, where they allow crime to run rampant. [cheers and applause]
So just in closing, we will rapidly return to full employment, soaring wages and record prosperity. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assault on law enforcement. [cheers and applause] Surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities and ban sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause] We will appoint prosecutors, judges, and justices who believe in enforcing the law, not their own political agenda. [cheers and applause] We will uphold religious liberty, free speech, and the right to keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause]
Biden wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike, a ban on American energy, eliminate America's borders, confiscate your guns. He wants to get rid of your Second Amendment. Appoint—[booing] We're going to be appointing very pro-crime judges, but they wanna destroy your suburbs. You know, the rule, the regulation that I just terminated. They wanna build low-income projects in the suburbs. They've been doing it. They've been destroying suburbs. We're not doing it anymore. Somebody said suburban women, how's Trump doing? But do you remember last time too? They said, "Women don't like Trump."
And we don't have crime and we don't have this violence. Chicago over the weekend, many people killed, many people shot, shot. They're actually shot and killed. New York, the same thing. New York's gone through the roof. They were up 300% in certain categories. And you say, what's happening? And we wanna send them in so badly. Joe Biden and his party spent the entire summer cheering on the rioters rampaging through Democrat-run cities, falsely labeling them as peaceful protesters. And you know, we call you peaceful protesters, you know why?
Meanwhile Biden, he doesn't say a word about the thousands of African Americans who are murdered each year as a result of violent crime in Democrat-controlled cities. They're murdered by the thousands and they never, ever mention it. My heart is with the hardworking patriots of all backgrounds who build up our communities, not the violent criminals and extremists and agitators and anarchists who burn them down. Next time you see video of screaming far-left maniacs shouting wildly at peaceful Americans, remember this. These are Biden supporters, and if he wins, they will be in charge of your government as sure as you're sitting there. You'll be taking your monuments down. You'll be taking your statues down. [booing] I'm not kidding, you'll be taking them down. You have to look at the D.C. report, I'm just telling you, go get it, you wouldn't even believe it. It's too crazy to even talk about, but we're never gonna give them a chance to do it. We're never giving them a chance. We're gonna win, we're gonna win big. This is a very important state, and by the way—[cheers and applause]
We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring wages, and record prosperity. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high crime communities, and ban all sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause] We will protect government benefits for American citizens, not for illegal aliens. What you're doing when you have all of these advantages, when you're giving them free healthcare, and free lawyers, and free college, and free everything, they all come. They didn't think of coming, but they see this, they talk and they talk to their friends and they all come in. They wanna come to America. You're just bringing people in and we don't wanna do that. We want people to come to our country, but they have to come in through merit and they have to come in legally, very simple. [cheers and applause]
Biden says he wants to protect Black lives, but his radical platform will cut short the lives of thousands of young African American citizens. Thousands. The murder rate in Democrat-run cities like Chicago, Baltimore, New York, so many others, is higher than in Afghanistan, yet Biden supports imposing these failed policies nationwide. You will have crime like you've never seen before. You'll have crime like you've never seen.
We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement—[cheers and applause]—surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities, and we will ban sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause] We will appoint prosecutors, judges, and justices who believe in enforcing the law, not their own political agenda. [cheers and applause] We will ensure equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed. [cheers and applause] We will defend the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause] We will uphold religious liberty, free speech, and the right to keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause] And you're lucky I'm here, because you're Second Amendment would be gone if I wasn't. [shouting] And they didn't touch it.
The President. You know what, I used to stand back and I'd say, you know, "Be quiet, please. Don't say that. It's really not nice." You know it's true. She deleted 33- Think of it. They'll never find the emails because they were acid washed, deleted. But you know what? She got a subpoena from the United States Congress, right? And she and her lawyer deleted 33,000 emails after she got a United States subpoena. And you say, "Why isn't she guilty of a major crime?" Right? And then she took her telephones and she smashed them with a hammer. Right? And then she took the other ones, and she deleted them. And now the Mueller scam, these people, the worst people. I have a friend, a very smart guy, very streetwise guy. He said, "You have to be the most honest guy in the world to go through three years of investigations, where they have the worst human beings in the world." They worked for the Democrats. They worked-
We built a convention center with 2,800 beds, and he didn't use the beds for senior citizens. He hardly used the beds at all. He hardly used the ships at all. He said we did a phenomenal job, and now he gets political. He wants to get political with me. A real wise guy, but that's okay. You gotta see what they are doing between him and de Blasio. That's another beauty. What they've done to my beautiful city. I love that city so much. What they've done is so horrible. The highest taxes in the land, crime all over the place. They're, like, 300% up in crime. We need Rudy to come out of retirement. [cheers and applause] But we're defeating the China virus. When Biden was vice president, he was a complete disaster on the swine flu, which was a much easier thing to handle. Joe Biden's own chief of staff said that when Biden managed swine flu in 2009, they, quote, "Did every possible thing wrong." This is the guy that worked for him in charge of the swine flu. And 60 million Americans got H1N1 in a period of time. And it's just purely a for-. . . He said it was just- "We were lucky." He said, "It's just lucky that there weren't great mass casualties." Different kind of a disease, a little bit.
By the way, all of these places were talking about, you know, are Democrat- run, Chicago, New York, Portland, Seattle. The only reason Seattle got settled, because they knew we were going in. We told them, "We're going in tomorrow morning. We're gonna open it up. We're gonna take it." It would have taken us 20 minutes. So they sent people that night, because they didn't wanna be embarrassed. But look at what we've done. And so, every place we've touched, we solved the crime, but they have to ask us. If they don't ask us, we're not supposed to do it, but maybe we do it anyway. [cheers and applause] And it usually takes anywhere from 25 minutes to about one hour.
That's where everyone aspires to, and that includes minorities and everybody. Don't let them ruin the suburbs. [cheers and applause] And with that comes tremendous crime. And you know, I was speaking, I was talking the other day, "Darling, somebody just moved next door." "Who is it?" "It's a representative of Antifa." She will look at her husband, say, "Darling, we're out of here. We're out of here." Antifa. Remember they were trying to blame other people. They don't like to mention the name Antifa. I said it's Antifa and I was right. I was right. They're bad people. And you know what, they have to pay a price for the damage and for the horror that they've caused, they have to pay a price. [cheers and applause] And it's so easy. It's so easy. A lot of them now are wealthy. You know, they're like these wealthy, spoiled kids that have no clue about life.
So, so far he's refused to do it. I'm probably forcing him tonight to do something, but he should put out a list of his judges so that you know where you stand. [cheers and applause] Biden supports cutting police funding, you know that, abolishing- And by the way-[booing]-did you see, we just got, Chicago police today endorsed Trump. That's not easy to do. Chicago. [cheers and applause] New York's finest, New York's finest endorse, Florida, Ohio, Texas. We have everybody. Is there a police officer in the country, if there is, they'll do a commercial. "This officer loves Sleepy Joe Biden, he's so tough on crime." So Biden's been going down very rapidly in the polls. And now what he's doing is he's playing tough guy, that he's tough on crime. All of a sudden, he goes from "demolish," "demolish and defund," okay? But he goes from, "Let's not give the police any money." Let's not even say "defund" for him. His people wanna defund the police. They actually have places, Seattle, they actually don't wanna have police. Minneapolis, they don't wanna have police. They don't wanna have police. What's gonna happen?
But most of these, most of the victims are women, children to a much lesser extent, but women and human traffickers. And you know, what made it that way is the internet. Who would think? It almost sounds like an ancient crime. It's not. It's very modern because of the internet, because of the computer. And it's a horrible thing and we've stopped so much of it. We have an incredible group of people that go after these animals. [cheers and applause]
Never forget that they're coming after me because I am fighting for you, and it's true. [cheers and applause] Over the next four years, to conclude, we will make America into the manufacturing superpower of the world And we will end our reliance on China once and for all. We will make our medical supplies right here in the United States. [cheers and applause] We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring economies, and a record prosperity, even greater than last year. [cheers and applause] We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities, and ban sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause]
Furthermore, the corporations, these poor, stupid people that run the— You know, they got paid a lot of money. They're weak, ineffective people, let's face it. They're funding anti-police organizations and other organizations that are— It's so embarrassing. And I don't mean for a little. Like, they gave 100 million dollars and 250 million. You're talking about serious money. You're talking about serious money, and that money is not used for good reasons. And these stupid corporations— And they'll be the first to go if the radical left ever took— They'd throw those guys out like they were nothing. If they were lucky, they'd just be thrown out. It would probably be a lot rougher than that. These people don't know what they're getting into. But instead of giving money, they should give money to the families of the crime victims and the fallen officers. That's what they should do. [cheers and applause]
Over the next four years, we'll be making America into the manufacturing superpower of the world and we'll end our reliance on China once and for all. We will make our medical supplies right here in the United States. We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring economies, and record prosperity. We will expand Opportunity Zones, and we will continue cutting taxes and regulations at a level that nobody has ever seen before. [cheers and applause] We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. And we'll be watching the ballots very closely also, by the way. [cheers and applause] And we will ban sanctuary cities. We will appoint prosecutors, judges, and justices who believe in enforcing the law, not in enforcing their own agenda. We will ensure equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed. We will defend the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause]
Biden is not a strong person, never was a strong person. In prime time he wasn't any good. Let's face it. And this is not prime time for him. This is not prime time. But he'll surrender your entire country to the radical left. And that's all they're doing is using him. He has no clue. So we will take this to a whole different level. What we're doing is taking it to a whole different level. We don't wanna have a socialist country. We don't wanna have— Some of you came, some of you came from parts of the world where it's socialist or worse. You know, it's called the C word, right? The C word. Because I think, in many cases, these people are talking even beyond socialism and we're not gonna let that happen. We're not gonna let the rule of law really be, just be ruled by the mob. We're gonna do it. We're gonna do it properly. We're gonna do it the way we're doing it. And again, remember the top 10 are all Democrat. And then you go into the top 25 and you take a look at that. It's the same thing. It's all a Democrat problem. Whether it's New York, where crime is through the roof, it's gone up, in some cases, 150 to 300%, not even recognizable.
The President. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. [cheers and applause] And look what happened in New York where they cut a billion dollars and they got rid of a lot of great, great crime fighters. And look at what happened in a short period.
And I will say this, if you're going to stop crime, we have to give the...the respect back to the police that they deserve. They've done a fantastic job in so many locations, but then bad things happen.

Look at New York. New York was a very safe city. Rudy Giuliani did a fantastic job. The city was safe, and then all of a sudden we have a mayor who starts cutting the police force and crime is up 100 percent, 150 percent. I saw one form of crime up 300 percent.

Now the problem is that in Democrat, usually liberal Democrat-run cities, we have tremendous problems. The top 10 most unsafe cities are run by Democrats. You go into the top 25 and top 35, almost every one of them is run by Democrats. No cash bail, just weak policies on crime.

How about that horrible crime that took place two days ago, where this terrible human being walks up to a police car with two people sitting in the car, and he starts shooting bullets right through the glass, right in their face? And just has destroyed. I mean, I...I hear they're going to make it but they're going to have a hard time ever being the same.

This guy walks up to a police car, and he starts shooting point blank rang at two innocent people. You can't let that happen. You have to, you have to be very tough crime when it comes to things like that.

We have to give -- we have to give the police back the authority to stop crime. When you have something like in Portland where it's just night after night, I could stop that with the people we have in a half an hour, if they'd let me do that but they...

If you talk about make America great -- if you look at just prior to -- and I'm talking about for the black community -- you look just prior to this horrible situation coming in from China, when the virus came in, that was the -- probably the highest point, home ownership for the black community, home ownership, lower crime, the best jobs they've ever had, highest income, the best employment numbers they've ever had.

Unfortunately, this went on for a week or a week and a half before he allowed us to bring in the National Guard. When we brought in the National Guard, everything stopped, the crime was gone meaning the whole thing. But by that time a big portion of the city was burned down.

If you look at all of the problems that we have, you look at crime, even somebody brought it up today, we're doing a great job relative to other countries on the coronavirus. You know how many names we have? Like 22 different names. I call it the China virus. We're doing a great job. But if you wanna really see a great job, take New York and some of these other Democrat-run states out of it. You'll see numbers that are unbelievable because New York had a very, very hard time. A lot of bad things happened. But you take a few of the states out and you'll really see numbers. But by comparison to other countries and by almost all metrics, we've done an incredible job, including the job of helping the world with ventilators and all of the things that we built. And I think our task force has been incredible. And Mike Pence has done a great job.
But over the next four years, we will make America into the manufacturing superpower of the world and we will end our reliance on China once and for all. [cheers and applause] We'll make our medical supplies right here in the United States, and right here in the great state of Wisconsin. [cheers and applause] We will rapidly return to full employment, that's happening very fast, soaring economies and the record prosperity will be even greater than it was last year. [cheers and applause] We will hire more police, increase penalties on assaults of law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities, and we will ban sanctuary cities, which are deadly. [cheers and applause]
My administration's keeping terrorists, extremists, and criminals the hell out of our country. We don't want them. [cheers and applause] We don't want them. We've got enough of them. We've got enough of them. Just today, we deported, as you know very well, dozens of Somali nationals charged or convicted with very grave crimes, including rape, assault, robbery, terrorism, and murder, of course. [shouting] These hardened criminals are back in their country, where they can do all the complaining they want—[cheers and applause]—and your children are much safer as a result. Thank you, President Trump. Thank you. [cheers and applause] If it were up to Biden, and it's not, it's the people that's around him. They are seriously radical left Democrats— and they're very dangerous. And the offenders are very dangerous, and they'd be running all over your state. Only by voting for me are you going to save—I hate to say this, I did it with your iron ore. I did it with some other things, and uh, I'll do it for you again. I'll do it for you again. But if you vote for me, I'm the difference, and I'm the wall. You know the wall that we're building on the southern border? [cheers and applause] I'm your wall—[cheers and applause]—between the American dream and chaos. Joe Biden is wholly owned and controlled by the left-wing mob. He has no clue where he is. This is not a sharp guy. [laughter]
The President. But I say this, I say this—Look, I could be home. So home was New York. I had to bail out because it was too crazy, everything has fallen apart. But home, it's so sad what the Democrats have done to our great New York. Between a governor and a mayor, the crime is through the roof, the corruption is incredible, it's a sad thing that's happened to New York. Hopefully it'll come back by somebody. Somebody will go in there and do like a Rudy.
They're trafficking women, it's because of the internet. You know, you think of that as almost an ancient kind of a crime, right? But it's not. It's a very modern crime, and it's an unbelievably profitable crime. They traffic in women, little bit children, but mostly women. Where they'll put three or four women in the back, in the trunk of a car and they'll go through the border. They can't do it anymore. And we, we're catching them. We have people that do nothing but look for the traffickers. To me, the traffickers are the biggest scum in the world. [cheers and applause]
The President. But we've helped Puerto Rico and we've really helped—If you look at what we've done for Israel, it's been, it's been incredible. They say nobody, nobody's done more. And it's my honor. [cheers and applause] But we'll hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, and we will ban deadly sanctuary cities, which are a disaster. [cheers and applause] We'll appoint tough on crime prosecutors. We will nominate judges and justices who interpret the Constitution as written. [cheers and applause] We will ensure equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed. We will defend the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause]
The Democrat-run states are not doing nearly as well as the Republican-run states and cities, and especially when it comes to crime. Biden's pledged to—that he wants a net zero carbon emissions, meaning no fracking, no gas-powered cars, skyrocketing energy bills, and abolishing millions of jobs. It'll cost this country millions and millions of jobs and your energy costs will go through the roof.
So, you wouldn't be able to survive a Joe Biden. You wouldn't be able to survive. You know, we've been calling it socialism. I don't think it's socialism. I think it's a step beyond, what they're talking about. You look at Portland, you look at Chicago, you look at New York, you look at Baltimore and Oakland and all— These are Democrat-run cities that are horrible on crime. There's no law and order, no cash bail, no anything. And you know what? The Republican cities are running great. They're running great. So, we're gonna get it all changed around. We went into Minneapolis, we solved the problem like you wouldn't believe. What did it take? You saw it. What did that take? I would say probably 30 minutes. Right? They should have called us in about seven days earlier.
The real authorities, they're watching, and the authorities are watching, but please report it. But when you look at it, really, it's amazing. And they're trying to make our numbers look bad, but even with numerous closed states, and you notice also law and order, right? Law and order, the red states, the Republican states, they're working great. Record low crime, record low, but—[cheers and applause]—Democrat-run states, you look at Chicago, you look at New York, New York has gone through a—We have to bring back, we should draft Rudy Giuliani. Okay? Let's bring him back. Draft Rudy.
We want Rudy. Rudy, Rudy. I'll tell you, Rudy's amazing, but he did a great job. New York was in big trouble. He came in and he, he just was tough, smart, and it became the safest big city. And now, we have a man where some categories of crime were up 300%. He fired 1,000. He fired a lot of police, I guess, a billion dollars a year worth of police, worth of great police, firemen and women. It's a terrible thing. I love that place so much and it's so sad to see what's happening to New York. We're gonna make a little bit of a play for New York. In theory, the Democrats automatically win New York, but I do phenomenally in most parts. And then one part, it's automatic, but I can't imagine that particular part is gonna be very happy. So, we're gonna make a play for New York. [cheers and applause]
They've gotta be able to do their job. You've gotta let them do their job. Gotta be able to do your job, right? They let you do your job, you'd see. You'd see Pennsylvania, got some big, bad crime numbers in your state. You let them do your job. Any state, New York's finest. By the way, I got endorsed by New York's finest. First time they've ever endorsed. [cheers and applause] And you know, that's hard when you have radical left running the city, all politicians, the mayor. And I got endorsed by the Chicago Police. Can you imagine that? And I got endorsed by Oklahoma and I got endorsed by Texas and Louisiana. I got endorsed by every—Florida, the sheriffs. All the sheriffs got together, they endorsed Trump.
These far-left justices would release violent criminals, shield foreign terrorists, impose sanctuary cities, and declare the death penalty totally unconstitution—hey, it will be totally unconstitutional. They wanna declare it unconstitutional for even the most depraved mass murderers. [booing] And it's a tough thing. It's a tough thing. They came to my office today and the death penalty—for clemency. I said, "What was the crime?" The crime was so horrible that I won't tell you what it was, but it's been going on for 21 years or so. The crime was so horrible that this person committed, that I said, "Look, I just can't talk about it." It was so, it as so horrible. And that's usually the case, usually the case, like the Boston bomber.
Sent young men to fight in endless wars. They just never ended. They're coming back home. You see that. They're coming back home. Many are already back. While our inner cities crumbled at home and made cities less safe and less secure. Joe Biden should not be demanding your support, he should be begging for your forgiveness. He really should be. [shouting] He should be. [shouting] My opponent drafted the 1994 disaster—[shouting]—the 1994 crime bill which caused unfair sentencing disparities that devastated Black families. And I mean just devastated. I have heard more about the 1994 and when we did criminal justice reform, it was largely about erasing that terrible act. That was his, that was his deal. I rolled back the unfair provisions of the 1994 Biden crime bill. And I signed it into groundbreaking criminal justice reform, which people are so happy about. [cheers and applause]
The President. The Democrat party's war on cops has caused Black-owned businesses to be burned and Black homes and churches to be totally destroyed. Most tragically of all, so many innocent Black lives have been cruelly taken from us. People are dying by the thousands in Black-on-Black crime, and I want it to stop. And people aren't talking about it. They're not talking about it. [cheers and applause] They're not talking about it. In Chicago, as an example, there are weekends when 60, 70, or more people are shot. This is shot, and many die. How can we allow this to go on? How can we allow this to happen? But they're all Democrat-run cities. Every year thousands of African Americans are murdered as a result of violent crime. And again, in these Democrat-run monstrosities. The way they run them, it's worse—
While the missing truck full of ballots is bad enough, other whistleblowers say they drove thousands of prefilled ballots right over state lines, which is a federal crime. A subcontractor for the Post Office, Nathan Pease, said that he was told by two separate postal workers that the Post Office in Wisconsin had collected and backdated over 100,000 ballots on the morning after the election. Unsurprisingly others also claimed the integrity of Dominion voting machines has been compromised and cannot be trusted.
The President. So, if you just take the crime of what those Democrat workers were doing, and by the way, there was no water main break. You know they said—there was no water main break. That's 10 times more than I need to win this state, 10 times more. It's 10 times maybe more than that, but it's 10 times more because we lost by a very close number. The alleged Biden margin of victory in several states is entirely accounted for by extraordinarily large midnight vote dumps. You saw them with going up to the sky, all extremely skewed to Biden. Like, Biden would get 10,000 votes and Trump would get three in a Trump area. Oh. For, example, at 6:31 AM in Michigan, reported 141,238 votes for Joe Biden and 5,900 votes for Donald Trump. 96% for Biden, 4% for Trump in an area where I should be doing quite well. You know, I won almost every county in Michigan, almost every district, it was—except for one. And they actually had more people, if you look at the ballots, they had ballots all over. They had more ballots than they had people voting. How do you do that? So, they had people, and they're voting, and then as you know, two of the canvassers were very brave. They didn't vote, and they got the hell knocked out of them from the standpoint of what they went through. They took, all the cameras went off and then they raised their hand, but then they couldn't sign it ultimately, but more ballots than they had voters. Now, how simple is that?
Second, again from this very respected political leader, "Second, there is clear evidence that tens of thousands of votes were switched from President Trump to former Vice President Biden in several counties throughout Georgia. For example, in Bibb County," anybody live in Bibb County? Bibb, Bibb, B-I-B-B. "President Trump was reported to have 29,391 votes at 9:11 PM, while simultaneously former Vice President Joe Biden was reported to have 17,218. Minutes later at the next update these vote numbers switched with President Trump now having 17,000. And Biden now having 29,391." [booing] That was a switch of over 12,000 votes. It was like a miracle. Third, "During this hearing, a presenter demonstrated that a Dominion Poll could be hacked into in real time because it was connected to the internet." Now, anything connected to the internet, that's not good. But this demonstration proved that these machines could allow votes to be siphoned off or added during the voting process because they're connected to the internet. Cybersecurity experts agree that voting machines should not be connected to the internet at any time, in any way, shape or form. Did you see that during the hearing? This guy sitting there. Well, can you connect into the machines? Yes. How do you do that? Within about 25 seconds, he controlled the internet. Former Vice President Biden led Georgia by only 11,779 votes. Every one of the things I told you about almost is more votes than what we're talking about. The crime that was committed in this state is immeasurable. An immediate forensic audit of an appropriate sampling of Dominion's voting machines and related equipment is critical to determine the level of illegal fraudulent ballots, improperly counted in Georgia during the 2020 general election and during tomorrow's race. You've gotta be very careful. [cheers and applause]
Decades of progress made in bringing down crime are now being reversed by this Administration's rollback of criminal enforcement.
And when a Secretary of State illegally stores her emails on a private server, deletes 33,000 of them so the authorities can't see her crime, puts our country at risk, lies about it in every different form and faces no consequence – I know that corruption has reached a level like never ever before in our country.
When the FBI Director says that the Secretary of State was "extremely careless" and "negligent," in handling our classified secrets, I also know that these terms are minor compared to what she actually did. They were just used to save her from facing justice for her terrible terrible crimes.
In fact, her single greatest accomplishment may be committing such an egregious crime and getting away with it – especially when others who have done far less, have paid so dearly. When that same Secretary of State rakes in millions and millions of dollars trading access and favors to special interests and foreign powers, I know the time for action has come.
We will bring the same economic success to America that Mike brought to Indiana, which is amazing. He is a man of character and accomplishment. He is the man for the job. The first task for our new Administration will be to liberate our citizens from the crime and terrorism and lawlessness that threatens their communities.
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
We're not here to help ourselves. We're here to devote ourselves to the national good. Public service is a high and great calling. It's our solemn duty, together, to protect the country, our country, this great, great country; to defend its workers and promote the well-being of all Americans. So many people are depending on us and on you as families, you as people that are going to get it done. So many people: the veterans, the unemployed, men and women serving in harm's way overseas, victims of crime, and young Americans looking to fulfill their dreams. So many of those young Americans, and they're going to be fulfilling their dreams. We're going to make it much easier for them.

Our order also does the following: ends the policy of catch-and-release at the border; requires other countries to take back their criminals—they will take them back; cracks down on sanctuary cities; empowers ICE officers to target and remove those who pose a threat to public safety; calls for the hiring of another 5,000 Border Patrol officers; calls for the tripling the number of ICE officers. And you both do an incredible job, but you need help, you need more. Creates an Office in Homeland Security dedicated to supporting the victims of illegal immigrant crime.
We're committed to securing our borders to reduce crime, illegal drugs, human trafficking, especially in border counties. We have a lot of the border counties represented.
So we're going to be very tough on crime. So we're going to be very tough on the drugs pouring in, and that's a big part of the crime. We're going to be very strong at the border. We have no choice. And we're going to be building a wall. We're starting very soon. General Kelly will be working with a lot of you. And he's fantastic. He was the one who got approved very quickly along with General Mattis. He's very, very outstanding. And I very much appreciate that you're here today.
Laramie County, WY, Sheriff Danny L. Glick. Mr. President, thank you. It's such an honor to be here. I'm Danny Glick, sheriff of Laramie County, Wyoming. You know, there are so many issues that you'll hear going around this table. One of the ones that probably isn't—that people don't realize is EPA decisions that have affected our coal industry, our oil industry in the West. But beyond that, it increases the number of people that are jobless and thus increases our crime statistics. And it's starting to overwhelm us. We're very small out there for the most part, and we don't have the numbers of deputies, officers, and law enforcement that can sometimes keep up with this. I appreciate what you've done and what you're planning in the future. I think it was very well publicized, and I just appreciate being here today.
The President. How much of your crime is caused, do you think, by drugs generally?
Acting Attorney General Boente. I am aware of that, Mr. President. And we have gotten a great deal of criticism for the asset forfeiture, which, as the sheriff said, frequently was taking narcotics proceeds and other proceeds of crime. But there has been a lot of pressure on the Department to curtail some of that. The President. So what do you do? So, in other words, they have a huge stash of drugs. So in the old days, you take it. Now we're criticized if we take it. So who gets it? What happens to it? You tell them to keep it? [Laughter]
We're going to go into the Oval Office. Does anybody have anything to—not even a question, a statement, as to how we can bring about law enforcement in a very good, civil, lovely way, but we have to stop crime—right? Would anybody like to make a statement?
He's a man of integrity, a man of principle, and a man of total, utter resolve. You just got a little witnessing of that. That resolve is what we need right now. America faces many challenges. We face the menace of rising crime and the threat of deadly terror. And it's not getting better, but it will get better very soon. It's going to get a lot better.

He will be a great protector of the people. I'm signing three executive actions today designed to restore safety in America. These executive actions continue to deliver on my campaign promises. First, I'm directing Department of Justice and Homeland Security to undertake all necessary and lawful action to break the back of the criminal cartels that have spread across our Nation and are destroying the blood of our youth and other people, many other people. Secondly, I'm directing the Department of Justice to form a Task Force on reducing violent crime in America. And thirdly, I'm directing the Department of Justice to implement a plan to stop crime and crimes of violence against law enforcement officers. It's a shame what's been happening to our great, truly great law enforcement officers. That's going to stop as of today.

There are a lot of things we need to do. First, we need to value and support and encourage the fabulous people who work there. I've worked with them over the years. I know how good they are, and their talents need to be directed at this Nation's benefit in a lot of different ways. We have a crime problem. I wish the blip—I wish the rise that we are seeing in crime in America today were some sort of aberration or a blip. I—my best judgment, having been involved in criminal law enforcement for many years is that this is a dangerous, permanent trend that places the health and safety of the American people at risk. We will deploy the talents and abilities of the Department of Justice in the most effective way possible to confront this rise in crime and to protect the people of our country.

We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing Federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation—take a look at Chicago and others—taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug-infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars, and we're not going to let it happen any longer.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
So I've directed the Department of Justice to take a firm, firm stance to protect our cops, sheriffs and police from crimes of violence against them. We will work with our police, not against our police. Our police do a great job, and they've never been troubled like they're troubled now. It's very unfair what's happening. So we want to cherish our law enforcement, and we will always protect those who protect us.

We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including our inner cities. We're going to make our inner cities safe again. Look at what's going on. Look at what's happening in Chicago: hundreds of shootings, hundreds of deaths. I'll tell you, what's happening in Chicago and many other places. Safety is a civil right, and we will fight to make America totally safe again. I've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy transnational criminal cartels, which are all over the United States, and we are going to stop the drugs from pouring into your country, into your community, into your cities, and poisoning our youth. We're stopping it. We're stopping it.

And we must support the victims of crime. I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims. The office is called VOICE: Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement. We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and silenced by special interests. Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose Government failed them. Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.

We are going to drain the swamp of government corruption in Washington, D.C., and we are going to keep our promises -- all of the promises that we made. We are going to massively reduce your taxes. (Applause.) We are going to reduce very substantially rising crime, and support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.)

The President: I don't know yet. People want the border wall. My base definitely wants the border wall, my base really wants it — you've been to many of the rallies. OK, the thing they want more than anything is the wall. My base, which is a big base; I think my base is 45 percent. You know, it's funny. The Democrats, they have a big advantage in the electoral college. Big, big, big advantage. I've always said the popular vote would be a lot easier than the electoral college. The electoral college — but it's a whole different campaign [unintelligible]. The electoral college is very difficult for a Republican to win, and I will tell you, the people want to see it. They want to see the wall, they want to see security. Now, it just came out that they're 73 percent down. ... That's a tremendous achievement. ... Look at this, in 100 days, that down to the lowest in 17 years and it's going lower. Now, people aren't coming because they know they're not going to get through, and there isn't crime. You know the migration up to the border is horrible for women, you know that? [nintelligible] Now, much of that's stopped because they can't get through.

As members of the NRA know well, some of the most important decisions a President can make are appointments, and I've appointed people who believe in law, order, and justice. That is why I have selected as your Attorney General, number one, a really fine person, a really good man, a man who has spent his entire career fighting crime, supporting the police, and defending the Second Amendment. For the first time in a long time, you now have a pro-Second Amendment, tough-on-crime Attorney General, and his name is Jeff Sessions.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The President. We'll build the wall, folks. Don't even worry about it. Go to sleep. Go home, go to sleep. Rest assured. That's the final thing—we need it. We need it. And if the Democrats knew what the hell they were doing, they'd approve it so easy, because we want to stop crime in our country. Obviously, they don't mind illegals coming in. They don't mind drugs pouring in. They don't mind——

Audience members. Boo! The President. I've known him a long time. Senator Schumer is a bad leader, not a natural leader at all. He works hard to study leadership. When you have to study leadership, you've got problems. [Laughter] And his policies are hurting innocent Americans and making it easier for drug dealers to enter our country. Schumer is weak on crime and wants to raise your taxes through the roof.

In this effort to restore safety to our country, we are going to strongly support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. I just signed an Executive order directing Attorney General Jeff Sessions to combat crimes of violence against our police, and the Department of Justice is now prioritizing the prosecution of criminals who attack officers of the law.

Attorney General Jefferson B. Sessions III. Mr. President, it's great to be here and celebrate this group. We are receiving, as you know—I'm not sure the rest of you fully understand—the support with law enforcement all over America. They have been very frustrated. They are so thrilled that we have a new idea that we're going to support them and work together to properly, lawfully fight the rising crime that we're seeing.

And I'll tell you what, Karen is going to be really incredible. She is going to be joining some wonderful people and doing some wonderful work, including major, major tax cuts and health care and lots of things. Going to be reducing crime, and we're securing that Second Amendment. I told you about that. And that looks like it's in good shape with Judge Gorsuch. That looks like it's in good shape.

You're the first group I've told that to. A solar wall. Makes sense. Let's see. We're working it out. We'll see. Solar wall—panels. Beautiful. I mean, actually, think of it, the higher it goes, the more valuable it is. It's like—[laughter]. Pretty good imagination, right? Good? My idea. So we have a good shot. That's one of the places that solar really does work. The tremendous sun and heat. It really does work there. So we'll see what happens with that. That would be great. And I think we could make it look beautiful too. It would really look beautiful. So that would be nice. We're also working night and day to restore law and order to our country. Law and order. You know that. We're reversing the last administration's soft-on-crime policies that helped enable a tragic rise in violent crime. You see what's happening. Look at Chicago. What the hell is going on in Chicago? [Laughter] What's that all about?

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

It's essential that Congress fund hundreds more Federal immigration judges and prosecutors—and we need them quickly, quickly—if we're going to dismantle these deadly networks. And I have to tell you, you know, the laws are so horrendously stacked against us, because for years and years they've been made to protect the criminal. Totally made to protect the criminal, not the officers. You do something wrong, you're in more jeopardy than they are. These laws are stacked against you. We're changing those laws. But in the meantime, we need judges for the simplest thing, things that you should be able to do without a judge. But we have to have those judges quickly. In the meantime, we're trying to change the laws. We're also working with Chairman Bob Goodlatte on a series of enforcement measures—and he's a terrific guy—to keep our country safe from crime and terrorism and in particular, radical Islamic terrorism. A term never uttered by past administration. Never uttered. Did anybody ever hear that term? I don't think so. But you heard it from me.

We're also keeping our country safe from criminal gangs and violent crime. We are taking the fight to the drug smugglers, human traffickers, and the vile criminal cartels like MS-13 who are being thrown out of our country so quickly you can't even count.

The President. But you know, they all said, Mr. President, your speech was so good last night, please, please, Mr. President, don't mention any names. [Laughter] So I won't. I won't. No, I won't vote—one vote away. I will not mention any names. [Laughter] Very Presidential, isn't it? Very Presidential. And nobody wants me to talk about your other Senator, who's weak on borders, weak on crime. So I won't talk about him.

We do not need to limit the potential of our children by trapping them in failing government schools. Every child should have the chance to explore their talents, pursue their passions, and know the joy of achieving their ambitions. And we will never tolerate crime in our cities, bloodshed in our communities, or acts of hatred or terrorism against our citizens. We will not stand for it.

And if you look at, as an example, President Clinton pardoned Marc Rich, who was charged with crimes going back decades, including illegally buying oil from Iran while it held 53 American hostages—wasn't allowed to do that—selling to the enemies of the United States. He was pardoned after his wife donated hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Clintons.

But no, Mexico will pay for the wall. It may be through a reimbursement. We need the wall very badly. As you know, Mexico has a tremendous crime problem—tremendous—one of the number two or three in the world. And that's another reason we need it. And the—just to add on, tremendous drugs are pouring into the United States at levels that nobody has ever seen before. This happened over the last 3 to 4 years in particular. The wall will stop much of the drugs from pouring into this country and poisoning our youth.

But he is going to be great, because he's tough on crime, he's tough on borders. Don't worry. Don't even think about it.
When you look at what's going on in Mexico, Mexico is having a tough time right now in terms of crime. More than ever, we need the wall. We have drugs pouring through on the southern border; they're literally pouring through. And we have to have the wall; we're going to have the wall. But if you look at just what's happening on the other side of the border with the tremendous crime and the tremendous problems going on—we have a very good relationship with Mexico, but there are a lot of problems, and we don't want the drugs, and we don't want the crime, but we need the wall.

Finally, we must adopt the most commonsense solution of all: to prevent our citizens from becoming addicted to drugs in the first place. We must and are focusing so much of our effort on drug demand reduction. We must confront the culture of drug abuse head-on to reduce demand for dangerous narcotics. Every person who buys illicit drugs here in America should know that they are risking their futures, their families, and even their lives. And every American should know that if they purchase illegal drugs, they are helping to finance some of the most violent, cruel, and ruthless organizations anywhere in the world. Illegal drug use is not a victimless crime. There is nothing admirable, positive, or socially desirable about it. There is nothing desirable about drugs. They're bad.
With that being said, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi did not show up for our meeting today. I'm not really that surprised. We have a lot of differences. They're weak on crime; they're weak on illegal immigration. They want the illegal folks to come pouring into our border, and a lot of problems are being caused, although we've stopped it to a large extent, as much as you can without the wall, which we're going to get.

The President. Well, we are very far apart because our views on crime and our views on immigration and the military, so many are different. But a lot of things have happened, even over the last 2 hours with respect to the missile launch. We want our military funded, and we want it funded now. It's going to be bigger, better, stronger—it already is—than ever before. But we want to get going on that now. So that is a difference, in all fairness, from this morning when I told them that we're way, way far away.

The President. Well, if that happens, I would absolutely blame the Democrats. If it happens, it's going to be over illegals pouring into the country, crime pouring into the country, no border wall, which everybody wants. I got elected partially because of the border wall.

Democrats in Congress want open borders, higher taxes, and Government-run health care that doesn't work—costs a fortune, doesn't work. They're soft on crime, and they want to suffocate our economy with socialist-style regulation, raise your taxes through the sky. They don't want to vote for our tax cuts because they want the exact—they want tax increases. That's why we need a Republican in the House. We need a Republican in the Senate. We need more of them.

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

It's not a news story when our officers save a life, rescue a family, or stop a crime. It's just another day on the job. Yet, no matter the circumstances, you serve tirelessly, selflessly, and heroically. You do it because you really believe in doing your duty and doing it properly.
In the last 2 years, America has seen a tragic rise in violent crime. In 2015 and 2016, we witnessed the steepest 2-year consecutive increase in murders in nearly half a century. And you look at what's going on in Chicago. What the hell is going on in Chicago? [Laughter] What the hell is happening there? [Laughter] For the second year in a row, a person was shot in Chicago every 3 hours. You don't think these people in this room can stop that? They'd stop that. They'd stop it. And just north of our Nation's Capital, in Baltimore, on average, someone was murdered nearly every day of this year.
If we want to bring down violent crime, then we must stand up for our police. All of us gathered here today share a common goal. We want every child to be able to walk safely home from school, and we want every mother and father to know their children will be secure when they tuck them in at night.
We need a physical border wall. We're going to have a wall—remember that—we're going to have a wall to keep out deadly drug dealers, dangerous traffickers, and violent criminal cartels. Mexico is having a tremendous problem with crime, and we want to keep it out of our country.

The President. Yes. Just so you understand—just so you understand, there's been no collusion; there's been no crime. And in theory, everybody tells me I'm not under investigation. Maybe Hillary is, I don't know, but I'm not.

But there's been no collusion. There's been no crime. But we have been very open. We could have done it two ways. We could have been very closed, and it would have taken years. But you know, it's sort of like, when you've done nothing wrong, let's be open and get it over with.

The President: Well allow—let me—[inaudible]. So, they make up a crime, and the crime doesn't exist. And then they say obstruction. And how could there be obstruction on firing Comey? When the man who's in charge of it wrote a letter that was far stronger than anything I would have written. He was in charge—Deputy Rosenstein. He wrote a letter that's far stronger than even what I say.

So there's no—you have a no-crime that was created, you have a phony crime and then they talk about obstruction. And how can they talk about obstruction when I was the most open person, in history, in terms of—there's never been a paper we didn't give them, there's never been a question we didn't answer.

The President: Of course there was no obstruction—excuse me. Of course there was no obstruction. But there was no crime. So now they're saying, could there be—now, I haven't even heard that they're looking at obstruct—I don't know that they're looking at obstruction.

We support our law enforcement partners, and we're working to reduce crime and put dangerous offenders behind bars. At the same time, we want to ensure that those who enter the justice system are able to contribute to their communities after they leave prison, which is one of many very difficult subjects we're discussing, having to do with our great country.

The vast majority of incarcerated individuals will be released at some point and often struggle to become self-sufficient once they exit the correctional system. We have a great interest in helping them turn their lives around, get a second chance, and make our community safe. Many prisoners end up returning to crime, and they end up returning to prison. Two-thirds of the 650,000 people released from prison each year are arrested again within 3 years.

We can help break this vicious cycle through job training—very important, job training—mentoring, and drug addiction treatment. And you know how we're focused on drugs pouring into our country and drug addiction. It's a big problem, even as we speak of this subject. We'll be very tough on crime, but we will provide a ladder of opportunity to the future.

Ms. Rollins. So, in Texas, we changed our laws, we've shut 8 prisons down, we've decreased our incarceration rate by 20 percent, but the most important part of all of that is, our crime rate is down 31 percent in the State of Texas since we undertook all of these reforms.

And by the way, the court — it wasn't me. The courts were not upholding that executive order. You have to do it through Congress. I want to solve the DACA problem. I will consider that a great achievement to solve the DACA problem. It's been out there for a long time. These are good people, these are people that should be able to stay in this country. We're going to solve the DACA problem. But we also want to solve a tremendous problem on the southern border, which is crime. We need a wall, we need the drugs to stop flowing in. They are coming in like — well, they're coming in less now than they were because we have a very strong — we have great Border Patrol agents, great ICE — we have great people and they are really doing a good job. And you see what's happening at the border, it's much better.

As we strengthen friendships all around the world, we are also restoring clarity about our adversaries. When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom. I am asking Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the terrible Iran nuclear deal. My administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.

Otto Warmbier was a hard-working student at the University of Virginia, and a great student he was. On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea. At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to America last June, horribly injured and on the verge of death. He passed away just days after his return.

The President. Because you go down to any law enforcement agency, you go down to the precincts, and you say, what percentage of your crime is drug related? And it's usually numbers like 70, 75, 80 percent. It's just a massive number.

Acting Director Homan. And two final points, sir. The last thing I'll say about these noncooperative jurisdictions: They, again, entice illegal entry. If they do not think that alien-smuggling organizations in Central America and Mexico are not using sanctuary cities as a selling point—they're saying, "Look, we can get you to San Francisco for this much money, and we'll get you to one of these places where you can even get arrested for committing a crime, and they're not going to help ICE take you into custody."

The President. Different ones or the same? Acting Assistant Attorney General Cronan. We—well, we haven't gotten to the point where they've come back yet—probably yet, sir—but I can give you one good example. We had a takedown a few months ago, Operation Raging Bull—there were 214 MS-13 arrests in the United States; 198 of them were foreign nationals. Of that, only 5 had legal status in the United States. And of the 193, 64 of them had illegally crossed the border as unaccompanied children. Most of whom were then, now, adults by the time they committed the crime.

Now, the Department of Justice—the Attorney General—is dedicating resources to this. He has announced the surging of hundreds of new U.S. attorneys to specifically focus on violent crimes in immigration. He has sent additional prosecutors to our southwest border. They were down there on detail to focus on an emphasis on enforcing immigration and criminal laws.

We're participating with local law enforcement through the Project Safe Neighborhoods. We're increasing prosecutions of Federal gun crimes. We're taking the fight to the drug dealers and drug pushers which, frankly, I think, is the number-one way we're going to stop drugs. We can form all the blue ribbon committees in the world, but the way you're going to stop it is you folks, with strong, really, law and order, when it comes to the drug—and the drug pushers, the drug dealers. It's going to—that's the way it's going to stop. It's going to—really, the number-one way. I think you probably all agree with that. And you've really done—especially, some of you have really done a job.

Reducing violent crime in America is a top priority for my administration, and we will do whatever it takes to get it done. No talk. We're going to do what it takes to get it done.

In 2017, our brave ICE officers arrested more than 100,000 criminal aliens who have committed tens of thousands of crimes. And believe me, these are great people. They cannot—the laws are just against us. They're against—they're against safety. They don't make sense. And you meet with Democrats, and they're always fighting for the criminal. They're not fighting for law-abiding citizens. They're always fighting for the criminal. Doesn't make sense.

The President. Here are just some of the criminal charges and convictions for the aliens arrested by ICE: 11,000 charges or convictions for sex crimes; 48,000 for assault; 13,000 for burglary; and 1,800 for killing people.

And we, of course -- we also have problems with crime, organized crime, in Sweden -- shootings. But it's not like you have these no-go zones. We have dealt with it. I'm dealing with it every day, allocating more resources to the police, more policemen trained, more resources to the security police, tougher law on crime, tougher law on terrorism, supporting terrorism. So we do a lot to combat that.
And we can also see some results now in our three major cities -- decreased shootings -- because we're attacking the organized crime very tough. And we'll keep on doing that because there is no space in Sweden for organized crime because they decrease freedom for ordinary people.
The State of California is sheltering dangerous criminals in a brazen and lawless attack on our constitutional system of government. Every State in our Union is subject to the laws and Constitution of the United States, including California. Yet California's leaders are in open defiance of Federal law. They don't care about crime. They don't care about death and killings. They don't care about robberies. They don't care about the kind of things that you and I care about.

To underscore the scope of that threat we face, last year alone, ICE arrested illegal immigrants with 48,000 charges or convictions for assault; 11,000 for sex crimes; 1,800 for killing people and other homicide-related offensive. And we have offenses that are so great we're not even going to talk about them right now. They are so great.

It's just—it's a common thing, and I—you know, some thoughts have come over my—in my head the last few days. This is actually a mass murder happening in the United States by illegal aliens killing American citizens. Over 63,000 Americans have been killed since 9/11 by illegal aliens. It's a crime spree that is being left unchecked, and these sanctuary city officials—State and city officials—they're putting American lives into harm every single day. And we have become collateral damage to their personal agendas, and it's got to be stopped.

These days, there's no such thing as a Blue Dog Democrat, a red State Democrat, or a conservative Democrat because they are all Pelosi Democrats: weak on crime, weak on terrorism, and weak on national defense.
Democrats like to campaign as moderates, but they always govern like radicals. That is why I am going to campaign all across this country to elect Republicans so that we can reduce taxes further, reduce crime, increase jobs, and make our communities safe and prosperous and secure. And I'll be all over the country. Kevin, you'll get me all over. Where is our Kevin? You're going to get me all over the country, Kevin. [Laughter] And I'll be complaining every single trip. [Laughter] But I'm going to get there.
You know, certain communities, believe it or not, like in San Diego, they want a wall. Nobody likes to talk about that. In fact, I said, "Don't build a wall there." They're all wanting it. And Jerry Brown, who's doing a terrible job as Governor, but you know. [Laughter] No, if you like high taxes and lots of other—and crime—[laughter]—that's your guy. [Laughter] But they go, and they talk so much about the wall. But in San Diego, as you know, there's a long stretch that is demanding the wall. So I said, okay—they were ready to start. I said: "Don't build it. We'll wait until we get everything approved." Because they're having a lot of pressure. They want the wall.

Frankly, if we have had more Republican votes, we wouldn't have had to give away what we gave away, which many of the people in this room, including me, don't like. Because it was a waste, in many cases. But the Democrats want things. They don't want to focus on crime and borders and people pouring into our country, many of whom are not the people we want to come in. We want a merit-based immigration system. We want people to come in on merit, not based on a lottery; you pick a ticket.

Mr. Giuliani. So congratulations. And what you've been doing is keeping your promises, and this is one of your promises. One of your promises was to shore up our country because one of the dangers we face—national security and crime—is cybersecurity. And a large part of our country, unlike other countries, is made up of the private sector. And the private sector is wide open to hacking. And sometimes, by hacking the private sector, you can get into Government.

So here, you're addressing not only a national security problem, but you're addressing the fastest growing form of crime in America, which is cyber theft. It's growing faster than any other crime.

We've stood up for the men and women of law enforcement, directing Federal agencies to ensure they are protected from crimes of violence. We've directed the creation of a Task Force for reducing violent crime in America, including the horrendous situation—take a look at Chicago and others—taking place right now in our inner cities. Horrible. We've ordered the Department of Homeland Security and Justice to coordinate on a plan to destroy criminal cartels coming into the United States with drugs. We're becoming a drug-infested nation. Drugs are becoming cheaper than candy bars, and we're not going to let it happen any longer.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
My budget increases spending, and the increase in all spending for Federal law enforcement also. And activities having to do with law enforcement will be substantially increased. And we will fight violent crime. You look at what's happening in our cities, you look at what's happening in Chicago—what's going on in Chicago? We will fight violent crime, and we will win. And we'll win that one fairly quickly. Once we give the local police, the local law enforcement the right to go in and fight it, and we back them monetarily and also otherwise—and we're going to win that one. We're going to win it fairly quickly, I believe.

As members of the NRA know well, some of the most important decisions a President can make are appointments, and I've appointed people who believe in law, order, and justice. That is why I have selected as your Attorney General, number one, a really fine person, a really good man, a man who has spent his entire career fighting crime, supporting the police, and defending the Second Amendment. For the first time in a long time, you now have a pro-Second Amendment, tough-on-crime Attorney General, and his name is Jeff Sessions.

Attorney General Jefferson B. Sessions III. Mr. President, it's great to be here and celebrate this group. We are receiving, as you know—I'm not sure the rest of you fully understand—the support with law enforcement all over America. They have been very frustrated. They are so thrilled that we have a new idea that we're going to support them and work together to properly, lawfully fight the rising crime that we're seeing.

The President. But you know, they all said, Mr. President, your speech was so good last night, please, please, Mr. President, don't mention any names. [Laughter] So I won't. I won't. No, I won't vote—one vote away. I will not mention any names. [Laughter] Very Presidential, isn't it? Very Presidential. And nobody wants me to talk about your other Senator, who's weak on borders, weak on crime. So I won't talk about him.

But he is going to be great, because he's tough on crime, he's tough on borders. Don't worry. Don't even think about it.
We must also deal decisively with other threats to our security and the future of our children, such as criminal cartels, human smuggling, drugs, corruption, cybercrime, and territorial expansion. As I have said many times before, all civilized people must come together to drive out terrorists and extremists from our societies, stripping them of funding, territory, and ideological support. We must stop radical Islamic terrorism.

From Japan, we traveled to another key American ally in Asia, the Republic of Korea. My official state visit to South Korea was the first by an American President in 25 years. Speaking before the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea, I spoke the truth about the evil crimes of the North Korean regime, and I made clear that we will not allow this twisted dictatorship to hold the world hostage to nuclear blackmail.

The President. It could happen. The Democrats are really looking at something that is very dangerous for our country. They are looking at shutting down. They want to have illegal immigrants; in many cases, people that we don't want in our country. They want to have illegal immigrants pouring into our country, bringing with them crime, tremendous amounts of crime. We don't want to have that. We want to have a great, beautiful crime-free country. And we want people coming into our country, but we want them to come on our basis. And that's why we're being so careful with our process and our screening.

So the Democrats maybe will want to shut down the country because they want people flowing into our country. And I want people coming into our country, but I want to vet those people, and I want to vet them very carefully. Because we don't want to have radical Islamic terrorism in this country, and we don't want to have crime in this country. If you look at what just happened in San Francisco, that was a disgrace. And as you know, the Federal Government just got involved and did a great thing, because they're going to take that at least to the next step. They did a great thing by getting involved.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

But it's not enough to secure only our schools. We must secure the communities where our kids are growing, and wherever they go we have to secure—and wherever anybody goes; not just the kids. And that's why we're committed to reducing violent crime like, I think, no other administration.

Last Saturday, the Asad regime again deployed chemical weapons to slaughter innocent civilians, this time, in the town of Douma, near the Syrian capital of Damascus. This massacre was a significant escalation in a pattern of chemical weapons use by that very terrible regime. The evil and the despicable attack left mothers and fathers, infants and children, thrashing in pain and gasping for air. These are not the actions of a man; they are crimes of a monster instead.

Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
Actually I, sort of, changed my mind after we started. I called my people, I said, "How much would it cost to stop building the wall in San Diego so they go out and advocate for us because they're desperate for their wall. Because they don't like people running over their front yards and all of the problems, including by the way massive amounts of crime?" I said, "How much would it cost to stop"—I'm in the construction business it's what I do best.
We're having a lot of problems with Democrats. They don't want to vote for anything. They don't care about lack of security. They really would like to have open borders, where anybody in the world can just flow in, including from the Middle East. From—anybody, anywhere, they can just flow into our country. Tremendous problems with that. Tremendous crime caused by that. We're just not going to do it.

So I'm going to be signing an Executive order in a little while before I go to Minnesota. But at the same time, I think you have to understand: We're keeping families together, but we have to keep our borders strong. We will be overrun with crime and with people that should not be in our country.

The President. Yes. They affect everybody. Those images affect everybody. But I have to say that you have double standards. You have people that want absolute security and safety, and you have people that do look at the children. And then, you have people like me, and I think most of the people in this room, that want both. We want the heart, but we also want strong borders, and we want no crime.

We don't want crime in this country. We don't want people coming in. We don't want people coming in from the Middle East through our border, using children to get through the lines. We don't want that. We're doing too good a job to allow that to happen. So we're not going to allow that to happen.

Republicans want strong borders and no crime. Very simple. Not complex. Democrats want open borders and crime, crime, crime happens automatically when you have those open borders. [booing]
Just days ago, a brave border agent was shot multiple times while protecting our border. Every day, border agents are keeping drugs, crime, and gangs from entering our country.
And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
Today we've also discussed how we can deepen our work together to respond to malign state activity, terrorism, and serious crime. In particular, on Russia, I thanked President Trump for his support in responding to the appalling use of a nerve agent in Salisbury, after which he expelled 60 Russian intelligence officers. And I welcomed his meeting with President Putin in Helsinki on Monday. We agreed that it is important to engage Russia from a position of strength and unity and that we should continue to deter and counter all efforts to undermine our democracies.

Today, both Russia and the United States face a whole new set of challenges. Those include a dangerous maladjustment of mechanisms for maintaining international security and stability, regional crises, the creeping threats of terrorism and transnational crime. It's the snowballing problems in the economy, environmental risks, and other sets of challenges. We can only cope with these challenges if we join the ranks and work together. Hopefully, we will reach this understanding with our American partners.
We can offer that the appropriate commission headed by Special Attorney Mueller—he can use this treaty as a solid foundation, and send a formal, an official request to us so that we would interrogate—we would hold the questioning of these individuals who he believes are privy to some crimes. And our law enforcement are perfectly able to do this questioning and send the appropriate materials to the United States.
So as part of my agreement with the European Union, they've agreed to purchase, almost immediately, large amounts of American soybeans, because China really tried to hurt the American farmer. China tried to hurt the American farmer, because that way they were going to hurt me. And that way, you would go, in November, and you would vote for people that don't want borders, they don't care about crime, they want to get rid of ICE. Democrats. How about the new one? They want to get rid of ICE.

Catch-and-release. How about that one? You catch a criminal, you take his name, and then you release him. He's got to show up to court within 4 or 5 years. [Laughter] In the meantime, they're committing crime in our country. These are the laws we have to work with. And despite that, we're setting records, but we have horrible, horrible immigration laws, and we're going to get them fixed. You've got to vote Republican, folks. You've got to vote Republican.

Can you believe it? Maxine Waters. She' sure something. But he's going to vote for Schumer. They're going to do whatever they say. They--I will say this. I will say this. The one thing, their policies are horrible. They're for open borders, meaning let all the crime come in. They're against so many things that you want.
Democrats want to raise your taxes. They want to raise them. I don't get it. I don't think I could win if I said I'm going to raise your--ladies and gentlemen, I'm going to raise your taxes. Oh, good. Alice, I don't we're voting for that guy. They want to raise your taxes. I don't know. Maybe they know something I don't know. Blue wave? We're going to raise your taxes. We're going to let crime go all throughout our country. We're going to get rid of ICE, so that as the crime comes in, we're going to have none of our people that are so tough--these are great people, but these are tough, strong--these are--these are warriors. These are warriors.
So they want to raise your taxes, they want to open your borders, they want crime to pour in, because that's what's going to happen when you open your borders. How about the governor, the governorship of California? He just announced that he wants to open borders and he wants to let anybody come in that wants to. And then he wants to pay for all medical, for all school.
Democrats also want open borders. And all of that equals massive costs. Massive. And massive crime and massive tears. Tears. You look at the families that have been so badly hurt. Republicans want strong borders. We want to finish the wall. We're up to $3.2 billion. We've done a lot of work on the wall. A lot of people don't understand that. But that's OK. Got to finish the wall.
We're going to have no crime. We want to protect America's great people and its great citizens. We want to protect American benefits, and we're doing that, and I've done it. In Maryland, the Democrat candidate for governor wants to give illegal aliens free college tuition, courtesy of the American taxpayer. [booing]
As we know, illicit drugs are linked to organized crime, illegal financial flows, corruption, and terrorism. It's vital for public health and national security that we fight drug addiction and stop all forms of trafficking and smuggling that provide the financial lifeblood for vicious transnational cartels.

The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance for human struggling and human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It's a horrible thing that's going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It's very, very cruel. Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs, and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hard-working citizens, and has produced a vicious cycle of crime, violence, and poverty. Only by upholding national borders, destroying criminal gangs, can we break this cycle and establish a real foundation for prosperity.
Because you know what? Border security, to the people of our country—very important. The wall is a big factor in border security. And I really believe that the people of our country, they want the wall, and they want border security. They don't want open borders like the Democrats want to have. They don't want crime pouring into our country. They don't want MS-13 pouring into our country. They don't want that.
And when you have crimes like this, whether it's this one or another one on another group, we have to bring back the death penalty. [applause]
Very simple. Now, I did a little tiny bit of research. And Mike's opponent, Brendan Kelly, is a vote for Nancy Pelosi and, of course, Maxine Waters--[booing]-- and their job-killing agenda. Brendan Kelly opposes your tax cuts. He's weak on crime. He's for open borders. Can you believe some--seriously. Forget about--forget about Brendan Kelly. Let's say you're a politician and you're running on this platform, open borders, we're going to take care of illegal aliens' health care. OK? Think of it. We're going to raise your taxes. Think of it. How do you--how do you win a race like that? Seriously. How does anybody win a race like that? I don't know.
Republicans want strong borders, no crime, and no caravans, right? [applause]
Homeland Security has just confirmed that members of the lawless caravan, the one you've been watching, come from 20 different countries and include among them criminals and gang members convicted of crimes ranging from armed robbery to sexual assault.
The choice in this election could not be more simple, a Republican Congress means more jobs and less crime. A Democrat Congress means more crime and less jobs. That's pretty good, that's nice and simple, doesn't get simpler than that.
These drugs kill more than 70,000 Americans every single year. Last year alone, our brave ICE officers who they want to get rid of by the way, these are tough, great, strong patriots. We need strength, arrested more than 127,000. Think of that, 127,000. . .[applause]. . . aliens. . .[applause]. . .with criminal records. Including those charged or convicted of 48,000 assaults, 12,000 sex crimes, and 1,800 homicides. They want to get rid of them, let's get rid of ICE. What are these people thinking? That's why you have to have Patrick Morrisey and Carol. You have to vote them in on Tuesday. You have to do it. [applause]
They don't want to have these people coming in. They don't want to have--some of these people are just horrible people. You have to see the crimes they've committed.
We're here today to restore one of the most effective crime prevention strategies in America: Project Safe Neighborhoods. This initiative brings law enforcement, community groups, and local leaders together to get the most violent criminals in the most dangerous areas off the streets and behind bars. After many years of neglect, we are bringing back this lifesaving program stronger than ever before.

Everyone here today is committed to the same vital goal: liberating our communities from crime and securing the right of all citizens to live in safety and to live in peace. In the 2 years before I took office, the violent crime rate increased by 7 percent, and murders were up by over 20 percent. But we're turning it around very quickly, much quicker than anyone thought possible.

At the same time, we are ensuring you have the resources you need to do your jobs properly. We have added nearly 200 new violent crime prosecutors across the country.

This year, thanks to the efforts of everyone in this room, I am proud to report a new alltime record for the prosecution of violent crime. You also prosecuted 15,300 defendants for Federal gun crimes, almost 20 percent more than the previous record.

As part of our comprehensive crime reduction strategy, we are reforming the prison system to help more former inmates get on the right track. We all benefit when those who have served their time can find a job, support their families, and stay the hell out of jail. Right? That's what we want. Stay out of jail. That's why I have called on Congress to pass the FIRST STEP Act so that more inmates gain the skills they need to become productive, law-abiding citizens.

The United States needs a physical barrier, needs a wall, to stop illegal immigration and to halt deadly inflow of drugs and crime. You have human traffickers. It's a thing that's horrible. Think of it: human trafficking. They kidnap people, they steal people, and they sell people. And because of the internet, one of the bad things that happens with the internet—one of the many bad things—but because of the internet, it's the highest it's ever been in history. And this is a world problem. This isn't a United States situation; this is a world problem.

You heard what the Secretary said about all of the crime and rape and everything else that takes place during that horrible journey. If they thought they couldn't get in, they wouldn't be making the journey.

We need Congress to fund the wall, fund the Government, and close the loopholes in our laws. If Congress wants to have catch-and-release at the border and more drugs, gangs, and crime to come into our country, it can continue to refuse to provide the funds that we need to build the wall, and it can continue to refuse to close the loopholes in our immigration laws. That is the choice here, sir. The President. That's great, Matt. And thank you very much. So true. And you mentioned one thing about courts—and I know you're hiring judges—but we're one of the only countries that anybody knows of where if you step one foot into our country, you now have a court case. Other countries, you step a foot, and they say "Get out." They put you out or worse. With our country, if you're able to put a foot onto our land, basically, that's what catch-and-release is, or even beyond that. But now you end up with lawyers and judges and things. It's so ridiculous.

You know, I have to say that it would be a lot easier if I never took up this issue, if I just left it the way it was, where people stream into the country. And we've had tremendous difficulties. You look at the numbers, you look at the crimes, you look at what we do, what we're doing now—we're taking out thousands and thousands of people that are in, as an example, MS-13, the gang—it's a brutal gang, a vicious gang. They love using knives because they're far more painful than guns. And what they do to people is incredible. And we're moving them out by the thousands. People don't talk about that. We're moving them out by the thousands. They came here over years, and they've taken over towns in Long Island and other places. They're bad people.

And I also want to note, Mr. President, that great work you did with President Xi on getting fentanyl scheduled so that it's a crime there, to cut down on the flow of fentanyl to this country. If we do not have border security on our southern border, it's going to redirect to Mexico, and it's going to come in from there and keep killing American citizens even with China scheduling it and stopping the flow from China. We'll get it out of Mexico if we don't get this border secured with a wall.

In the last 2 years, ICE officers made 266,000 arrests of aliens with criminal records, including those charged or convicted of 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 violent killings. Over the years, thousands of Americans have been brutally killed by those who illegally entered our country, and thousands more lives will be lost if we don't act right now.
The President. Well, I may do that at some point. If Chuck and Nancy—who I'm meeting with, I believe in a little while—if they don't agree to the fact that our country is—really got problems with crime, with drugs, with a lot of other things that come through our southern border—so much of it comes through the southern border. You look at heroin, 90 percent through the southern border. So much. So many problems.

The President. If we declare a national emergency, we have a tremendous amount of funds—tremendous—if we want to do that, if we want to go that route. Again, there is no reason why we can't come to a deal. But you have another side that doesn't care about border security. The Democrats—which I've been saying all along—they don't give a damn about crime. They don't care about crime. They don't care about gang members coming in and stabbing people and cutting people up. They don't care about crime.

And if they're not going to care about crime, then I agree: They shouldn't do anything at the border. But I care about crime, and I care about drugs. We're spending a fortune on trying to stop drugs, and they pour in through the border. But I see it more now than ever before. The Democrats don't care about the border, and they don't care about crime.

The President. The buck stops with everybody. They could solve this problem in literally 15 minutes. We could be back. We could have border security. They could stop this problem in 15 minutes if they wanted to. I really believe now that they don't want to. I really believe that. I really believe that they don't care about crime. I really believe this. The Democrats don't care about crime.

They've been taken over by a group of young people who, frankly, in some cases—I've been watching—I actually think they're crazy. But they've been taken over by a group that's so far left. I really don't think they care about crime. And you know, sadly, they're viewing this as the beginning of the 2020 Presidential race, and that's okay with me. But they have been taken over by a group of people that don't care about gangs. They don't care about human trafficking and drugs. They don't care about anything. I'll tell you what, they have gone crazy.

But law enforcement and ICE and Border Patrol, incredible job you're doing. The public loves you. The public—not like; they love you. And I just hope that none of you run for President, because that—you may be the one people—person that we have a problem with. Because you are highly respected in our country and beyond our country. We know what you do with MS-13. We know what you do with the gangs. We know what you do with crime. And we also see what you do on the border.

And before, when I left Washington, I said they can't have a problem with crime, because the people that are coming in—the criminals, the gangs, the traffickers, the drugs—it's all crime. And the only way you're going to stop it is the way these people are strongly recommending that it be stopped, Brandon.

So, hopefully—I hear we're making a lot of progress. I even hear certain Members of the—of Congress, the Democrats, are saying: "We better get this thing going. This isn't working out too well for us." Because nobody is going to win the battle of strong borders and no crime, as opposed to open borders and crime doesn't matter. Because that's what they're saying: Crime doesn't matter.

In the last 2 years alone, our courageous ICE officers, many of whom are with, arrested criminal aliens charged with or convicted of 100,000 assaults—this is in the last year—30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 violent killings.

Senator John Cornyn III. Well, thank you, Mr. President, for being here and for hearing firsthand from not only the people who suffered at the hands of the crime that occurs as a result of people who don't come here to achieve their American Dream, but people who come here to cause death and destruction and human misery.

[State Attorney General Paxton continued his remarks, concluding as follows.] And finally, I wanted to say something about your comments about human trafficking. I started a human tracking unit my first year in office. And I did it because—largely because of the border. We have the second highest human trafficking rate in the country. Over 300,000 people are victims of that crime every year. That's the research. Houston is the worst city in America. And so we're addressing that. And border security will clearly have a positive impact on those horrible and horrific statistics that are affecting our women and our children.

And you'll see the crime rate in this country go way down. And we're already doing very well in terms of crime rate, but it's not being helped by what's going on. We could make it a lot better. So I appreciate it very much. Thank you very much, Ken.

But it's not the crime at the border, which has got its own problems; it's what happens once they get through the border and they're dispersed or they disperse themselves throughout the country. And all of that crime is because of it.

So we're here today to address the humanitarian and security crisis on our southern border. I just got back. It was a sight to behold. Not pretty. Very dangerous. Drugs are flowing across. Human traffickers—you think of that as an ancient crime. It's not an ancient crime. It's more prevalent today in this world—far beyond the United States. It's a world crime given to us, very much, by the internet and bad people.

The President. This was like—you know, it's amazing, because I get—it got no publicity. I didn't see it. You don't read about this stuff. They're not telling you the truth about—really, you're doing this country a tremendous disservice. You're not telling the truth about the criminal activity and the crime. Twenty-six people or thereabouts. What was the number? Twenty-six?

The media is not telling the American public how—how bad it is, how dangerous it is. I mean, I read a little story about the 26. I said, "How could that be a small story?" But what's going on—the crime, and the drugs, and the smuggling, and the—of everything, including children. We're talking women, yes. But probably, the biggest victim of everything we're talking about today are children.

In 2017, drugs killed over 70,000 of our fellow citizens—just think of that; that's like a football stadium loaded up—and imposed costs on our society in excess of $700 billion dollars. In the last 2 years, ICE officers arrested 266,000 illegal aliens—think of that—with criminal records, including 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 violent murders or killings.

We have absolute right to do that. I have an absolute right to call national security. We need strong borders. We have to stop drugs and crime and criminals and human trafficking. And we have to stop all of those things that a strong wall will stop. I could call it a barrier, but I think I don't have to do that so much anymore. We'll call it whatever we want. But the point is that we have to have a stoppage. Billions and billions of dollars of illicit things are pouring through our border. And you know, we talk about points of entry, and one of the things that we do have is a lot of money now from points of entry, because everything was given. The money was given—so much that you almost don't know what to do with it—by Congress. But when it came to the wall, they wanted to hold back, because it was politics. That's all it is.
Including those charged or convicted of approximately 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, 25,000 burglaries, 4,000 kidnappings, and 4,000 violent murders. These are people that ICE is going in and getting and either putting in jail or ideally bringing them back to other countries and letting them put in jail, because we don't want them. We don't want to have to pay for them for 50 years. You want them to pay a price, but we don't want to have to pay for them for 50 years.
Just ask the "angel" moms, how good are they? Those great "angel" moms who were treated so badly—so badly. Incredible people. But the simple reality is that every crime committed by an illegal immigrant is a crime that should never have happened in the first place.
The President. Thank you very much. And you're right about that. It goes into Iowa and Idaho and New Hampshire and—you know, it's not the border, it's the border, and then they come in, and you end up in places that you would never think of the kind of crime that we see. And it comes right through this border. It starts right here. That's why, if we stop them at the southern border of Mexico—which, right now, Mexico is doing—that would be a fantastic thing. And I think that's happening. I think it's—never been before. Never—nobody's ever seen anything like it.

Kern County, CA, Sheriff Donny Youngblood. I'm a sheriff from the Central Valley of California, and I have three other Central Valley sheriffs. We feel this impact from 400 miles away. Each of us have experienced heinous crimes that are committed by people in our country illegally. And I just want to take this opportunity to thank this President for doing the right thing and standing up for law enforcement in this country. It is greatly appreciated, and I just want you to know that.

But we have horrible, old-fashioned laws that are put in by the Democrats. We're willing to change them. We can do it in—I used to say 45 minutes—we can do it in 15 minutes, whether it's catch-and-release or chain migration or any of them. The asylum laws are absolutely insane. They come up. In many cases, they're rough gang members. In many cases, they're people with tremendous crime records, and they're given a statement to read by lawyers that stand there waiting for them, "Read this statement." And it says: "I have great fear for my life. I have great fear for being in my country." Even though, in some cases, some of these people are holding their country's flags and waving their country's flags. And then, they talk about the fear they have of being in the country, that the flag they were waving freely.

That's happening all over our country—ICE. But the job that ICE and that, really, Border Patrol does is an incredible job. And law enforcement in this country is—the job they're doing is really incredible. You know, I don't know if you saw the crime stats, but the statistics are that crime is way down in our country over the last year. Way, way down. And so that's despite all of the problems we have at the border. And we're straightening that out.

Wages are going way up, crime is going way down, and our military is more powerful right now than ever before. [cheers and applause] And when we took over two and a half years ago, our military was in big trouble. It was depleted, you know that. It was depleted, the equipment was old, the planes were old. Ah we have the most beautiful fighter jets in the world being delivered now, every day. Every day.
Fred Keller is a tough man, he's tough on crime. He loves our military, loves our police, he loves our vets and he will always protect patients, and he will always go for, like me, and I say it so strongly because the fake news doesn't want to say it. We will always protect pre-existing conditions, very important.
On the issue of the Democrat Party, it's never been further outside from the mainstream than it is now. These people have gone nuts. More than 120 Democrats in Congress have signed up for Bernie Sanders total government takeover of health care. Now, tell me many of you have phenomenal health care. You have private health care; 180 million people. They want to take it away from you. They want to take away your health care, your health insurance, they wanna take it away. Democrats are now the party of high taxes, high crime, open borders, late-term abortion, killing your Second Amendment, and radical socialism. [booing]
