Over the last 15 years, Room at the Inn has provided housing, childcare, counseling, education, and job training to more than 400 women. Even more importantly, it has given them hope. It has shown each woman that she is not forgotten, that she is not alone, and that she really now has a whole family of people who will help her succeed.

Democrats will also destroy your healthcare by inviting millions upon millions of aliens to violate our borders. Once they arrive, they want to sign them up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. [booing]
And thanks to the extraordinary service of our military in Afghanistan—19 years we're in Afghanistan [booing]—we may now be able to seek a political resolution that, frankly, they've wanted to talk about for a long time. We've hit 'em very hard, but it's been 19 years. Think of that, 19 years. We spend more on military in Afghanistan, $50 billion a year, than most countries spend on their entire country, healthcare, education, everything. We spend more than they do.
Remember this about yourself. You know I always hear the elite, the elite. Well, I always said they said it. I said it here my last night. I always say they say the elite. They're the elite, I am not. Well, I've a better education than them, I'm smarter than them. I went to the best schools. They didn't. Much more beautiful house, much more beautiful apartment, much more beautiful everything. And I'm President and they're not, right? [cheers and applause]
So, we get a very bum press, but that's OK, because we're here and they're not, right? We're here and they're not [applause]. A very dishonest people and maybe it'll change. You know, what's wrong with having a strong military, good education, a strong economy. I don't get it, I don't get it. I don't get it, the hatred is incredible, but let's just keep it going folks, because that's the way it is.
Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
OCASIO-CORTEZ: Well, I think that we have a very real risk of losing the presidency to Donald Trump if we do not have a presidential candidate that is fighting for true transformational change in the lives of working people in the United States. I think that if we elect a president on half-measures that the American people don't quite understand the agenda of a president, you know, a president that says we're fighting for higher wages but we don't want a $15 minimum wage, fighting for education but we don't to make colleges tuition-free, fighting for women's rights, et cetera, but we don't want to go all the way with that, then I think we have a very real risk of losing the presidency.
STEFANIE BROWN JAMES, DEMOCRATIC STRATEGIST: Yes, absolutely. Well, and I think part of her popularity is that she's able to really talk about issues that everyday Americans face. Health care, education, equal pay. And so, you know, she --
We will continue rescuing our inner cities from disastrous reign of Democrats who presided over the decimation of their education systems, the outsourcing of their jobs, and the devastation of their neighborhoods.
Do you ever notice that? They don't go after our construction workers, who love us. They don't go after the police. They don't go after—we have incredible people. You know, we're the elite. They say they're elite. You know. Do you ever hear this? Hey, I live better than all of them. [Laughter] Great education. The greatest houses. The great—but I guess I'm not elite. They live like in the basement of their mom's home. [Laughter] Their arms are this big. Look, like this. But they have the black—they have the black masks on, and they have sticks. And they hit people. [Laughter] They hit people in the face, in the head, this Antifa.

You know, I see them, they're great. Great ladies. You're great. You know it's interesting with women, so women want to have strong military protection. They want to have strong borders. They want to have strong law enforcement. They want to have great education. They want to have low taxes for their family, not high taxes. They want to have all the things that we talk about. Why wouldn't they want Trump more than anybody else? [cheers and applause] The other side is gonna go the opposite. [cheers and applause]
You know, you say you want low taxes, good education, strong military, strong borders. You want to have safe homes. You want a house, you want low interest rates, you’ve got low … Hey, you got low interest rates. The lowest ever. Got low rates, it’s a good time to refinance your house, by the way. Great time. You got everything, and then you see these people they’re against . . .  They have no idea what they’re doing. They have no idea what they’re against.
Incredible, the strides that we've made. We will defeat the Democrat effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, and education by liberating Americans from their endless push for a job-killing, soul-crushing Washington regulations. As an example, we're trying to get the car companies, gonna give them a little bit of extra energy, and they'll be able to build a car that consumers can buy, which will be better than the car they make today.
I came to America when I was 13, without knowing English, with my parents, because of a civil war from El Salvador. And through education and perseverance and also hard work and work ethic, I am now the owner of Nation Waste, a fully certified company in America.

And I just want to say—you know, Nation Waste—who would have thought that this little girl, who came to America from El Salvador, not knowing English, went to school—through education—now owned a—not only—I'm the first Latina in the waste management industry in the country, and the largest multimillion-dollar company in the State of Texas.

Also a man, you don't wanna fight him, and you don't wanna play him in hockey because he was tough. He just won, not that recently but pretty recently, and I was out here campaigning for him and working hard, and it turned out to be an easy race because everyone loves him and respects him. Congressman Pete Stauber. And a man who gets in the trenches, and he just doesn't care. He wants to win for the people. He loves you. He loves this state. He loves this country. Jim Hagedorn. Thank you. [cheers and applause] And a great friend of mine with his incredible family. He's a friend. He's smart. I guess you'd say he's brilliant. His education is incredible, his military career has been incredible. Then he ran for office, and now he's a United States Senator from the great state of Arkansas, Senator Tom Cotton. [cheers and applause] Great guy. And Minnesota Senate Majority Leader, Paul Gazelka. Paul. Thank you, Paul. Minnesota GOP Chairwoman, Jennifer Carnahan. She's been incredible. [cheers and applause] I said, "Jennifer, are we gonna win in 13 months?" She said, "Honestly sir, I've never seen anything like this. It's gonna be easy. Don't ever say ... Just assume we're like two points behind, okay?" Two points behind.
In a recent Democratic debate, every single Democrat Presidential candidate raised their hand, in favor of giving free government healthcare, to illegal aliens. [booing] And then, you wonder why they come to America? Why wouldn't they come? Free healthcare, free education, free everything. And I jokingly said one time–and everybody then gets a Rolls-Royce. And the fake news said, "President Trump, lied. He said that the illegal immigrants all get a Rolls-Royce." They don't have a lot of sense of humor. That's the problem with this press, what a bunch of dopes. Free Rolls-Royce. "The President told a lie. They don't get a Rolls-Royce." I'm only kidding about the Rolls-Royce. I just don't want to have a story. You know, I have a bad story. I did it again. I promised the Rolls. I–I was just kidding.
I said: "Brett, this will go so fast. This will be so easy. You're perfect." [Laughter] "You've got the perfect family, the perfect wife, the perfect education. You're the best student. You went to the best school. They've been talking about you for 10 years. This will go quick and easy." [Laughter] So much for predictions, folks. [Laughter]

And you know, I am at 94-percent approval rating, but still you have people out there—they don't get it. They don't get it. So we love the Republicans. We love what we're doing. We love our programs. And in many cases, we're better politicians than them. We have much better policies. We want strong borders. We want powerful education. We want freedom of speech. We want a strong military.

But if Democrats seize power, they would throw the floodgates wide open, wide open. We would have people coming into our country, look at what's going on in California, and the people of California don't want it, they say, "Come into California. We'll give you free healthcare, free education." Why wouldn't ... I may even move to California if they keep going. No, but all it does is it brings everybody in. What's wrong with these people? We're rebuilding our military stronger than ever before and we are not going to deplete it again on stupid, senseless, endless wars. [cheers and applause] We've invested more than two and a half trillion dollars restoring our armed forces and all of it was built in the USA—[cheers and applause]—and that includes approving the construction of almost 200 F-35 fighters, stealth, stealth. And many of them are built right here, right here. You know that, right? In Fort Worth. [cheers and applause] As we restore our security, we're also restoring our prosperity. America is winning again and America is respected again. [cheers and applause] And by the way, I have to say this, so outside they have close to 30,000 people. And I wonder if I could ask the Fire Marshal, fill up this little area, let them in, it would be so nice. You know they have a certain max, we broke the record tonight. [cheers and applause] Good place.
But Stacey Abrams wants to give illegal aliens the right to vote. Do you believe this? [booing] I mean, some of these people, they wanna give them education. They wanna give them this. They wanna give them free healthcare. They wanna give these people, that come into our country illegally ...
But Matt Bevin has made record investments in education spending for Kentucky students. Education is so important to him. Matt Bevin will defend your Kentucky values. he loves his state, from an all-out assault being waged on you from the extreme left. Not good. I can't even imagine, how can you vote for somebody from the extreme left? This guy, Beshear, is a major lefty. You know that, right? Why are we even ... Let's just have a good time. Are you sure we need an election tomorrow, Matt? I don't know. How does Kentucky vote for a person ... I'm telling you, he will always vote for Pelosi and Schumer and Shifty Schiff.
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Our polls have gone, over the last month, they've gone through the roof. You look at it, take a look at it, it came out today. The FireHouse poll, the FireHouse poll it's an important poll. It was always good. I never looked at it. Today, I like it a lot. We're up through--nobody can even believe it. So what Pelosi did, and as I said, they do the impeachment, then right away, let's do USMCA, right on top of it. You'd think she'd wait like a day. She wanted to smother the impeachment crap, and that's probably what she did, at least to an extent. But any Democrat that votes for this sham will be voting to sacrifice their house majority, their dignity, and their career. Okay? [applause] And some of these partisan lunatics have already said that if they fail this time, think of this. How about low IQ Maxine Waters? How about Green? How about Green? We've Green. How about Green, where he said, "We have to impeach him because if we don't impeach him, we're not going to win the election." This is what were--this is what we're dealing with. You know, we're dealing with some very bad people. We're dealing with people that don't respect you. And by the way, you know they talk about the elite? You're the elite. They're not the elite. You're the elite. [applause] You're the elite. You got better education. You got better—you got better everything. You're the elite. It always bothers me, they said, "The elite." This is the elite. Look at these people. How beautiful. This is the elite. [applause] You know who are the elite? You look at those jobs reports. We're the best in history unemployment for African Americans, best in history unemployment Hispanic Americans, best in history unemployment Asian Americans. You're the elite. You're the elite.
Torrance, CA, resident Malak Hijaz. I pray five times day. Oh, my name is Malak Hijaz. I pray five times a day and I have to pray at lunch. And I would bring the hijab to cover my hair, and kids would make fun of me, harass me, and attack me. And I would tell the principal, and the principal actually blamed everything on me. At the end, me and my mom complained so many times, and I didn't have a good education at the end. So yes, everything was blamed on me.

The tens of thousands of Americans gathered today not only stand for life—it's really here that they stand for it so proudly together, and I want to thank everybody for that. You stand for life each and every day. You provide housing, education, jobs, and medical care to the women that you serve. You find loving families for children in need of a forever home. You host baby showers for expecting moms. You make—you just make it your life's mission to help spread God's grace.

We are protecting Medicare for our nation's seniors. Democrats want, and you know this, Democrats wanna raid Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. [booing] And you know, we all have a heart. We all have a heart, but when you tell people to come into our country, like this clown governor of California, come into our country, come. They're all gonna come. If they think they're going to get free education, free healthcare, they're all gonna come. If you don't say it, they're not gonna come. Because who would even think this?
And we will never let the Democrats give away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, especially when we say, "Come in. Come in, we'll give you healthcare." You know, it's one thing they come in and it's a rough situation because we all have hearts but when people are saying, like in California this wacky governor, he says, "Come in, we're gonna give you healthcare. We're gonna give you free education. We're gonna give you everything. We're gonna give you a beautiful Rolls-Royce." See to show you how fake they are one of the newscasters said, "Donald Trump said that the governor of California promised a Rolls-Royce to illegal immigrants. He didn't promise them. This was a lie and a misrepresentation by President Trump." They can't take a little humor. They can't take it. These people are sick. They're sick. [booing] No. They're sick people.
Anyway, Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. It's true. And our numbers with African-American workers, people, are through the roof. Are through the roof because-- [cheers and applause] Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose?" I'd read the down the worst on crime, the worst on education. They got this, they got that, they got 10 different things, all horrible. And one day I'm in front of this tremendous group of people and I'm reading this list, African-American, they have the highest crime rate, they have the highest this, they have the worst education, they have the worst schools, they have the worst-- I said, "Stay with me," because they were with the Democrats for a hundred years, more. I said, "Stay with me. What the hell do you have to lose?"
The next step forward in building an inclusive society is making sure that every young American gets a great education and the opportunity to achieve the American Dream. Yet, for too long, countless American children have been trapped in failing government schools. To rescue these students, 18 States have created school choice in the form of Opportunity Scholarships. The programs are so popular that tens of thousands of students remain on a waiting list.
Every young person should have a safe and secure environment in which to learn and to grow. For this reason, our magnificent First Lady has launched the "Be Best" initiative to advance a safe, healthy, supportive, and drug-free life for the next generation: online, in school, and in our communities. Thank you, Melania, for your extraordinary love and profound care for America's children. Thank you very much. My administration is determined to give our citizens the opportunities they need regardless of age or background. Through our Pledge to American Workers, over 400 companies will also provide new jobs and education opportunities to almost 15 million Americans.
My budget also contains an exciting vision for our Nation's high schools. Tonight I ask Congress to support our students and back my plan to offer vocational and technical education in every single high school in America.
Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They want to let anyone into our country from all around the world. Just come on in, folks, we're going to give you free healthcare. We're going to give you free education. [booing] We're going to give you more than our vets are getting. We're going to give you--every family will get a free Rolls Royce. You know I said that, Matt. I said that to them and some of the fake news picked it up and they said, "President Trump said every family coming into our country illegally gets a brand-new free Rolls Royce. He lied. He lied. He lied." They gave me a Pinocchio. They don't get it, Matt, do they, Matt? Actually, they get it better than we understand. They get it very well. They get it. They know what's happening. And the wall is being built. I will tell you the wall is being built. [applause] And you know they went after us on everybody knows the wall is going up. So, what's happening--you know, you do know who's paying for the wall, don't you? Right. Redemption from illegal aliens that are coming. The redemption money is paying for the wall. They're so sad to hear that because it's okay, finally, they go. You have to understand an entire party is fighting. They'll give me anything I want. Our military would rebuilt it. 2.2, it's really $2.5 trillion over a period of three years. They give me anything but not 10 cents for the wall. They said, "We like drones." Well, drones don't keep people out. Drones are wonderful. They fly around, take pictures. We're going to give you a drone. No good. So, we now have built over 100 miles of wall. [applause]
Nowhere has the American left more thoroughly violated this sacrosanct principle than on immigration. Illegal immigration costs American taxpayers hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars a year, funds that could be used to improve our schools, roads, hospitals, and other vital services. Instead, Democrats want to take even more of your money to give illegal aliens free health care, free Federal welfare, free education. They get treated better than they want to treat our military and our vets. And it—I stopped it. But it's crazy.
Republicans believe access to education is a civil right. It's a civil right. [cheers and applause] Twenty of 20 of the most dangerous cities in America are controlled by Democrats. Think of that, 20 of 20. And so is nearly every major city with a child poverty rate that's over 30%. They're controlled by Democrats. We can name every one of them. The murder rate in Baltimore and Detroit is higher than El Salvador, Guatemala, or even Afghanistan. How they doing, the Democrats running those cities? Your whole country will be like that. In 2018 alone, our police arrested nearly 12,000 people for murder and manslaughter, 25,000 people for rape, and nearly 1.5 million for assault, violent assault. The Democrats' push against our police will drive up crime and drive up costs at levels you'd never believe. Thousands of innocent lives will be lost. As president, I will always support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. [cheers and applause]
So we're fighting for school choice because we know that access to education is a civil right. It's a civil right. School choice. Did you ever see two parties so diametrically opposed to each other? I mean, it's—who can be opposed to that? But it's so important. But the Democrats will never ever allow that to happen.

We'll restore patriotic education to our schools. I mean, what they're teaching students today is incredible. They come home; it's like a different world. What is it—1619 now? All of a sudden, they change. Now they're thinking about making another change because they don't like that. I don't know.

We will restore patriotic education to our schools and teach our children to love their country, honor our history, and respect our great American flag.

Joe Biden recently raised his hand on the debate stage and promised, here give away -- he was going to give it away, your healthcare dollars to illegal immigrants, which is going to bring healthmassive number of immigrants into our country. Massive numbers will pour into our country in order to get all of the goodies that they want to get, education, healthcare, everything.
We will win the race to 5G and build the world's best cyber and missile defense, already under construction. We will fully restore patriotic education to our schools and always protect -- we will always, always protect free speech on college campuses. [applause]
Please understand when you see those commercials, it means your drug prices are coming down. We will strongly protect Medicaid and Social Security, which they will give up. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] And America will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] And we will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause]
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] We will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust," and we're gonna keep it that way. [cheers and applause] For years, you had a president who apologized for America. Now you have a President who is standing up for America and standing up for your state, Nevada. [cheers and applause] So get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors, get your coworkers, and on November 3rd or sooner, get out and vote. [cheers and applause]
Sleepy Joe Biden wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike, ban American energy, destroy the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. How about that one? And you know the bad part about that? You know, we all, we all have heart. We wanna take care of people. Problem with that is, everybody's gonna come to the United States. People that weren't even thinking about it, they're gonna say, "Oh man, these idiots are giving free healthcare, free college education. They're giving free everything. They're giving a Rolls Royce to every family that enters through the southern border."
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause] For years, you had a president who apologized for America. Now you have a president who is standing up for America and standing up for the great state of Ohio. [cheers and applause] So get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors, get your co-workers, get everybody, and get out and vote. Gotta get out and vote. [cheers and applause] And in your state, in Ohio, early voting has already begun, and don't wait. And when you see them cheating on the other side, I don't say "if," when, when you see them cheating with those ballots, all of those unsolicited ballots, those millions of ballots, you see them, anytime you do, report them to the authorities. The authorities awaiting and watching.
The President. I had such a nice life before doing this. [laughter] But no administration has ever done in the first three and a half years, not even close, what we've done, and that's very gratifying, I wanna tell you that. [cheears and applause] And thank you very much. We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. We're already doing it. [cheears and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheears and applause]
After years of rebuilding other countries, we're finally rebuilding our country. [cheers and applause] The path to the American dream has always been education. Republicans believe that school choice is the civil rights issue of our time. [cheers and applause] And Joe Biden isn't allowed to go there because of the radical left. He's controlled by the radical left, totally. He's exhausted. [laughter] But Biden's promised a ban on charter schools and to oppose school choice. Joe Biden is willing to spend billions and billions upon resettling refugees from all around the world, but he won't spend one penny providing school choice to Black children in America—[shouting]—which is interesting. During their first year in office, President Obama and VP Biden cut funding for historically Black colleges and universities. [booing] I've increased HBCU funding and I made it permanent. [cheers and applause] You know, just a quick story. So, so what was happening is that, the first year I saw these probably 42 people came up and they were the heads of individual colleges, historically Black colleges, universities. And they were the heads and I see them and I said, "Oh, hello, how you doing?" They were nice people. And we took a picture in the White House. We do that.
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. You. You. And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust."
We will always support the heroes of law enforcement. We will maintain America's unrivaled military might, and we will preserve peace through strength. [applause] We will protect social security and Medicare, and we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. But, we will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and children and restore a patriotic education to our schools. We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history and always respect our great American flag. [applause] And we will live by the words of our national motto, In God We Trust. [applause]
David and Kelly will protect Social Security and Medicare, and they will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And, we will live by the words of our national motto, In God We Trust, and it'll stay that way. [cheers and applause] From Atlanta to Augusta, to Savannah, to Columbus, from Athens—And, I wanna say hello to Herschel Walker, Athens. [cheers and applause] Herschel. 10.2 yards a carry for a while, he made a lot of quarterbacks look very good. We love Herschel. To right here in Dalton, Georgia, we inherit the legacy of generations of American Patriots who gave their blood, sweat and tears to defend our country and to defend our freedom. We stand on the shoulders of American heroes who crossed the oceans, settled a continent, tamed the wilderness, laid down the railroads, raised up the great skyscrapers, and won two World Wars, defeated fascism and communism, and made America into the single greatest nation in the history of the world, and the best is yet to come. [cheers and applause] And proud citizens like you helped build this country. And together we are taking back our country, our fight to drain the Washington swamp and reclaim America's destiny and dignity has only just begun. We will not bend, we will not break, we will not yield. We will never give in, we will never give up, we will never back down. We will never, ever surrender. [cheers and applause] Because we are Americans, and we are from Georgia—[cheers and applause]—and our hearts bleed red, white and blue. [cheers and applause] We are one movement, one people, one family, and one glorious nation under God. And together with the incredible people of Georgia, we have made America powerful again, our military. We have made America wealthy again, our stock market. We have made America strong again, look at that arm, look at that. We have made America proud again, we're proud of our country. We have made America safe again. And we will make America great again. Go get 'em, David, go get 'em, Kelly, go get 'emm tomorrow. [cheers and applause]
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
The President. Yes, it's very sad. And you know, the reason is for protection and safety. So the statute is so plain and so clear. I said last week—I was speaking to a great group of sheriffs, the sheriffs group in Washington, and I said, if you have a college education, you can understand it; if you have a high school education, you can understand it; if you were a bad student in high school, you can understand it. And I was told—I'll check, but I found it hard to believe—in an over 30-page decision by the appellate court, three judges—and you could tell by the way they were reacting, because it was broadcast on television, and everything we do gets a lot of people watching. So you could tell by the way that phone call went, wasn't looking good. And when they wrote their decision, as I understand it—maybe I'm wrong—but they didn't write the statute that they were making the decision about, because every word of the statute is a total kill for the other side.

And there's another major promise I have kept to the American people: I've nominated a fantastic Justice to replace the late, great Justice Scalia. His name is Judge Neil Gorsuch. And he comes from my list of 20 very, very highly qualified judges. He's an incredible, and he has an incredible résumé. He's respected by all. His education is as good as it can get. His writings are truly amazing. He will be a true defender of our Constitution.

And, very importantly, we are going to work to restore local control to our Nation's education system. Betsy is here someplace, and she is going to be, I think, fantastic. I think she's going to be fantastic. Stand up, Betsy. Betsy feels so strongly, and she has had such support from so many people. You know, you don't see that too much because you see the anti, you never see the positive. But I can tell you, I've had so many calls while she was going through that horrible process. That was a tough, tough, nasty process. And she hung in, she was as strong as you get. But so many people were calling Betsy, saying you will do such a fantastic job once you get it.

It's like sometimes I'd say, it's much tougher to get into Harvard than it is to stay there. Does that make sense? [Laughter] It's tougher to get into the Wharton School of Finance—you can't get in. But if you get in, it's fine, you get through, right? I think you're going to do a fantastic job, and we're very proud of you. And you took a lot of heat, but you're going to do great. So she wants to bring decisionmaking powers back to parents, back to the families, and back to the States, where they can really control education.

But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind and the souls of every American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time. I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African American and Latino children. These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious, or home school that is right for them.

I come from a small town in South Jersey. My aunt is a teacher, and she taught me the importance of education. My uncle is a firefighter. He taught me the importance of law and order. I went to a private high school. I was a cheerleader. I went to college, where I joined a sorority. After I left college, I had an injury and was prescribed pain killers, and so quickly, it took off from there. I didn't know anything about heroin. I was never warned, not that it's anybody else's fault; I take full responsibility.

But we've also at the DEA now turned to education, prevention. We talk about those things all the time. I want folks to know, if I may, sir, we do a national take-back program twice a year. The next one is on April 29, and people can drop off at 5,000 sites around the country—courtesy of DEA and our local partners—anything in their medicine cabinet that they don't want. Last year, we took in 1.6 million pounds of stuff. It includes everything.

In all things, we are returning power to the people where it belongs. We're going to defend the Second Amendment and your right to keep and bear arms. We are going to bring education local, and we are going to end Common Core. We are going to stop Federal overreach and defend the God-given rights of every American family.

At the same time, we have had significant progress for our citizens on issues such as education, housing, health, and social services. Millions of Colombians have been lifted out of poverty. Today, we continue next to you as partners in Peace Colombia to consolidate peace in the most affected areas. With the robust support of your Government, we are removing thousands of antipersonnel mines that murdered and mutilated children, women, and soldiers. We are healing the wounds of our victims, and we are embarking on a big social development program.

Our shared agenda, framed within a high-level dialogue that we Colombians value so much, includes cooperation which has allowed us to have unprecedented progress towards quality education for everyone. And this is a priority in the policies of my Government, and we wish to do more with regards to innovation and technology.

Secretary of Education Elisabeth P. DeVos. Mr. President, it's a privilege to serve, to serve the students of this country, and to work to ensure that every child has an equal opportunity to get a great education and, therefore, a great future.

Every American deserves a path to a great job that they truly love. That begins with the right education, one that gives students the foundation for a lifetime of success. Every day, as your President, I will be committed to this goal.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

But I'm going to do something better than that. We're going to have choice. Now, we have choice in education now. We're starting that, right? And I thought of it the other day. We're going to have choice in jobs so that you don't have one job and hang on, even though you don't like it. You're going to have choice, where you can take five jobs, six jobs, seven jobs, pick the one you like at the most money. That's what's starting to happen, because the jobs are coming in. That's what's starting to happen.

Vice President Pence. We truly do believe that there are opportunities after our discussions this weekend for bipartisan work on a broad range of issues from infrastructure to workforce to vocational education. And I can say, I'm even more confident, after this weekend's discussions, that, with the President's leadership and with the strong leadership in the Congress, we're going to keep delivering for the American people in 2018 and we're going to create a stronger and more prosperous America.

Kernen: Do you have a way of addressing the skills gap and education? As a businessperson, you solve problems. Now you're in government ...

So my son Zaire Kelly went to—college-bound—right after school, to announce that he was declaring for his college to run track and to further his education and become mayor of District of Columbia or something like that.

However, at our school, just a solution, we actually have checkpoints. When a student walks in the door, we actually have metal detectors. And I oftentimes see that in urban education. And we actually have an x-ray machine that students put their bags through. And extremely—right after this incident happened, a parent who didn't so much agree with it at first, sent me an e-mail saying: "Thank you. Because now I see exactly what's happening."

Today we're here with State and local leaders, law enforcement officers, and education officials to discuss how we can make our schools safe and our communities secure. And no better time to discuss it than right now. And I think we're making a lot of progress, and I can tell you there are—there's a tremendous feeling that we want to get something done. And we're leading that feeling, I hope. But there's a great feeling, including at the NRA, including with Republican Senators and, hopefully, Democrat Senators and Congressmen.
One of those areas is education. What can we do better to assist educators and parents and first responders on dealing with serious mental illness situations? Second is, what can we do around screening and identification of those at risk for serious mental illness? The third is treatment, both preventive treatment for those who are recently diagnosed, but also those who are an imminent risk of danger to themselves or others. And that might involve involuntary issues. As talked about earlier, how can we be of assistance there to get people the care that they need to live fruitful and good lives, but also be safe.
Commissioner of Education Pam Stewart of Florida. Mr. President, I'm Pam Stewart. I'm the commissioner of education for the great State of Florida.
You remember, I'd come into big rooms, big audiences, and I'd say, what do you have to lose? Because the Democrats have always had that vote. I said, what do you have to lose? Horrible on crime. Horrible on education. Horrible on everything. I say, what do you have to lose? And they voted for me, and we won. But now the numbers are much higher than they ever were with African American—but we're happy.

Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
I said, "Wait a minute. When you pass the tax reform act of whatever year, nobody knows it's tax cuts." "Well, I think they do." Great, let's give everybody an education. We're going to give 350 million people an education. You got to call it the Tax Cut Act. The Tax Cut Act. [applause]
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
Unemployment claims are at a 44-year low. That's a great number. Maybe the one that makes me happiest is this—because I remember, I'd go around, I'd say: "What do you have to lose? Vote for me. The Democrats have always been with you. Vote for me." They've—you know, bad education. The most unsafe parts of the country. All of these different—I'd say to the African Americans, I'd say: "What you have to do? What do you have to do? Vote for me. What do you have to lose?"

Representative Thomas J. Cole. Mr. President, first, thank you for having us. Thank you for your leadership. I think probably all of us around this table would say defense is the number-one priority, the number-one bill. It's probably the only reason why you signed the omnibus. But I think I'm actually sitting next to the other—the key to getting defense. We know for us as Republicans, defense is number one. Quite honestly, for Democrats, labor, health and human services, and education tend to be number one.

And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
That bonus will help support the education of her two sons, Cameron and Christian. Pretty good, right? [Applause] Pretty good. So we're so happy for your family, and I know your sons are going to make you very proud. They're great young men. And, LaSonya, please, would you say a few words? Please.

Ms. Hill. Thank you, Mr. President, for the invite. It's an honor to be here today. As you said, Crowley Maritime was able to benefit from the tax reform by paying employees bonuses. And in return, my family, we were able to invest in our children's education. So——

Last year, I signed legislation—it's amazing, I just said, "last year." It's been a long time already, hasn't it? That was some campaign, wasn't it? I signed legislation so that veterans can use their GI bill education benefits at any point in their lifetime. It's a big difference. They never expire, so vets can get the education they need when it is right for them.

And his academic credentials—something very important to me in that education has always been a priority—are as good as I have ever seen. He received his undergraduate degree from Columbia with honors. He then received his law degree from Harvard, also with honors, where he was a Truman Scholar. After Harvard, he received his doctorate at Oxford, where he attended as a Marshall Scholar, one of the top academic honors anywhere in the world. After law school, he clerked on the Supreme Court for both Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy. It is an extraordinary résumé, as good as it gets.

Judge Gorsuch is an exceptionally qualified person from the standpoint of experience and education: Columbia with honors, Harvard Law School with honors, Oxford at the highest level. Great, great student, great intellect. Supreme Court Justices White and Kennedy he clerked. And so I just think it's really great that we're having this meeting, because we want to have him go through an elegant process as opposed to a demeaning process. Because they're very demeaning on the other side, and they want to make you look as bad as possible. And of course, the press can be very demeaning too, so—but I'm sure the press will be very dignified in this case.

The President. Well, I think there's a certain dishonesty if they go against their vote from not very long ago. And he did get a unanimous endorsement, and he's somebody that should get it. I mean, you can't do better from an educational, from an experience, from any standpoint. A great judge; he'll be a great Justice.

So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
The President. Yes, it's very sad. And you know, the reason is for protection and safety. So the statute is so plain and so clear. I said last week—I was speaking to a great group of sheriffs, the sheriffs group in Washington, and I said, if you have a college education, you can understand it; if you have a high school education, you can understand it; if you were a bad student in high school, you can understand it. And I was told—I'll check, but I found it hard to believe—in an over 30-page decision by the appellate court, three judges—and you could tell by the way they were reacting, because it was broadcast on television, and everything we do gets a lot of people watching. So you could tell by the way that phone call went, wasn't looking good. And when they wrote their decision, as I understand it—maybe I'm wrong—but they didn't write the statute that they were making the decision about, because every word of the statute is a total kill for the other side.

And there's another major promise I have kept to the American people: I've nominated a fantastic Justice to replace the late, great Justice Scalia. His name is Judge Neil Gorsuch. And he comes from my list of 20 very, very highly qualified judges. He's an incredible, and he has an incredible résumé. He's respected by all. His education is as good as it can get. His writings are truly amazing. He will be a true defender of our Constitution.

And, very importantly, we are going to work to restore local control to our Nation's education system. Betsy is here someplace, and she is going to be, I think, fantastic. I think she's going to be fantastic. Stand up, Betsy. Betsy feels so strongly, and she has had such support from so many people. You know, you don't see that too much because you see the anti, you never see the positive. But I can tell you, I've had so many calls while she was going through that horrible process. That was a tough, tough, nasty process. And she hung in, she was as strong as you get. But so many people were calling Betsy, saying you will do such a fantastic job once you get it.

It's like sometimes I'd say, it's much tougher to get into Harvard than it is to stay there. Does that make sense? [Laughter] It's tougher to get into the Wharton School of Finance—you can't get in. But if you get in, it's fine, you get through, right? I think you're going to do a fantastic job, and we're very proud of you. And you took a lot of heat, but you're going to do great. So she wants to bring decisionmaking powers back to parents, back to the families, and back to the States, where they can really control education.

But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind and the souls of every American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time. I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African American and Latino children. These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious, or home school that is right for them.

In all things, we are returning power to the people where it belongs. We're going to defend the Second Amendment and your right to keep and bear arms. We are going to bring education local, and we are going to end Common Core. We are going to stop Federal overreach and defend the God-given rights of every American family.

Romanians have made contributions to the United States and to the world. Very notable among them was Nobel Prize laureate Elie Wiesel, who was born in Romania and, sadly, passed away almost 1 year ago. And I understand that earlier this week, the American Jewish Committee presented President Iohannis with its very prestigious Light Unto the Nations Award for his work to further Holocaust remembrance and education in Romania. I join the AJC in saluting your leadership in that vital cause.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

Vice President Pence. We truly do believe that there are opportunities after our discussions this weekend for bipartisan work on a broad range of issues from infrastructure to workforce to vocational education. And I can say, I'm even more confident, after this weekend's discussions, that, with the President's leadership and with the strong leadership in the Congress, we're going to keep delivering for the American people in 2018 and we're going to create a stronger and more prosperous America.

Rep. Hoyer. I want to follow up on that. There are no Democrats that don't want to make sure that the military is funded properly. And over the last 4 years, we had an agreement between Mr. Ryan and Senator Murray—Speaker Ryan and—that we understand that our military is critically important. But we also understand that our domestic issues, whether it's education, whether it's health care, whether it's the environment, whether it's transportation and infrastructure, they're important, as well.

One of Staub's employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where he trained to become a welder. Like many hard-working Americans, Corey plans to invest his tax cut raise into his new home and his two daughters' education. Corey, please stand. And he's a great welder. [Laughter] I was told that by the man that owns that company that's doing so well. So congratulations, Corey.

Here are the four pillars of our plan: The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by their parents at a young age. That covers almost three times more people than the previous administration covered. Under our plan, those who meet education and work requirements and show good moral character will be able to become full citizens of the United States over a 12-year period.

So my son Zaire Kelly went to—college-bound—right after school, to announce that he was declaring for his college to run track and to further his education and become mayor of District of Columbia or something like that.

However, at our school, just a solution, we actually have checkpoints. When a student walks in the door, we actually have metal detectors. And I oftentimes see that in urban education. And we actually have an x-ray machine that students put their bags through. And extremely—right after this incident happened, a parent who didn't so much agree with it at first, sent me an e-mail saying: "Thank you. Because now I see exactly what's happening."

Today we're here with State and local leaders, law enforcement officers, and education officials to discuss how we can make our schools safe and our communities secure. And no better time to discuss it than right now. And I think we're making a lot of progress, and I can tell you there are—there's a tremendous feeling that we want to get something done. And we're leading that feeling, I hope. But there's a great feeling, including at the NRA, including with Republican Senators and, hopefully, Democrat Senators and Congressmen.
One of those areas is education. What can we do better to assist educators and parents and first responders on dealing with serious mental illness situations? Second is, what can we do around screening and identification of those at risk for serious mental illness? The third is treatment, both preventive treatment for those who are recently diagnosed, but also those who are an imminent risk of danger to themselves or others. And that might involve involuntary issues. As talked about earlier, how can we be of assistance there to get people the care that they need to live fruitful and good lives, but also be safe.
Commissioner of Education Pam Stewart of Florida. Mr. President, I'm Pam Stewart. I'm the commissioner of education for the great State of Florida.
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
And his academic credentials—something very important to me in that education has always been a priority—are as good as I have ever seen. He received his undergraduate degree from Columbia with honors. He then received his law degree from Harvard, also with honors, where he was a Truman Scholar. After Harvard, he received his doctorate at Oxford, where he attended as a Marshall Scholar, one of the top academic honors anywhere in the world. After law school, he clerked on the Supreme Court for both Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy. It is an extraordinary résumé, as good as it gets.

American Enterprise Institute Resident Fellow Gerard T. Robinson. Mr. President, my name is Gerard Robinson. I'm a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, and I was proud to be the leader of the education policy team for Trump-Pence transition.

Judge Gorsuch is an exceptionally qualified person from the standpoint of experience and education: Columbia with honors, Harvard Law School with honors, Oxford at the highest level. Great, great student, great intellect. Supreme Court Justices White and Kennedy he clerked. And so I just think it's really great that we're having this meeting, because we want to have him go through an elegant process as opposed to a demeaning process. Because they're very demeaning on the other side, and they want to make you look as bad as possible. And of course, the press can be very demeaning too, so—but I'm sure the press will be very dignified in this case.

The President. Well, I think there's a certain dishonesty if they go against their vote from not very long ago. And he did get a unanimous endorsement, and he's somebody that should get it. I mean, you can't do better from an educational, from an experience, from any standpoint. A great judge; he'll be a great Justice.

We have a full agenda, unlike a lot of other meetings that happen of this general type. We're going to cover some of the immigration things. We're going to cover regulatory relief. We're going to cover tax and trade, women in the workplace, infrastructure, and education. And in each of those areas, we'll get suggestions, ways to make things happen, happen faster to improve the country.

But it all begins with education, and that's why we're here this morning. And I'm here also to celebrate a little bit with Betsy, because we started this journey a long time ago, having to do with choice and so many other good things with education. And I'm so happy that that all worked out.

Right now too many of our children don't have the opportunity to get that education that we all talk about. Millions of poor, disadvantaged students are trapped in failing schools and this crisis—and it really is a crisis—of education and communities working together, but not working out. And we're going to change it around, especially for the African American communities. It's been very, very tough and unfair. And I know that's a priority, and it's a certainly a priority of mine.

Charter schools, in particular, have demonstrated amazing gains and results. And you look at the results; we have cases in New York City that have been amazing in providing education to disadvantaged children and the success of so many different schools that I can name throughout the country that I got to see during the campaign. I went to one in Las Vegas; it was the most unbelievable thing you've ever seen. And they've done a fantastic job.

So there are many, many such schools, and we want to do that on a large-scale basis. We can never lose sight of the connection between education and jobs. I'm bringing a lot of jobs back. We're bringing a lot of big plants back into the country. Everyone said it was impossible. And before I even took office, we started the process. And tremendous numbers of plants are coming back into this country: car plants and other plants. And I have meetings next week with four or five different companies, big ones that are going to bring massive numbers of jobs back.

So we're doing it from the jobs standpoint, but education only makes it better. Our goal is a clear and very safe community, great schools, and we want those jobs that are high-paying jobs; we've lost a lot of our best jobs to other countries, and we're going to bring them back.

So I'm going to do my job, and Betsy, at the education level, will do her job. And just to do it very, very formally, I want to congratulate you on having gone through a very tough trial and a very unfair trial, and you won. And there's something very nice about that. And I'll tell you the real winner will be the children—I guess a couple of adults will be in there as well—[laughter]—but will be the children of this country. And I just want to congratulate you. Fantastic job.

Secretary DeVos. Well, Mr. President and Mr. Vice President, I am just very honored to have the opportunity to serve America's students, and I'm really excited to be here today with parents and educators representing traditional public schools, charter public schools, homeschools, private schools, a range of choices. And we're eager to listen and learn from you your ideas for how we can ensure that all of our kids have an equal opportunity for a high-quality, great education and therefore an opportunity for the future.

Teacher Julie R. Baumann. Good morning, I'm Julie. I teach special education at a public school in New Jersey.

So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
The President. Yes, it's very sad. And you know, the reason is for protection and safety. So the statute is so plain and so clear. I said last week—I was speaking to a great group of sheriffs, the sheriffs group in Washington, and I said, if you have a college education, you can understand it; if you have a high school education, you can understand it; if you were a bad student in high school, you can understand it. And I was told—I'll check, but I found it hard to believe—in an over 30-page decision by the appellate court, three judges—and you could tell by the way they were reacting, because it was broadcast on television, and everything we do gets a lot of people watching. So you could tell by the way that phone call went, wasn't looking good. And when they wrote their decision, as I understand it—maybe I'm wrong—but they didn't write the statute that they were making the decision about, because every word of the statute is a total kill for the other side.

And there's another major promise I have kept to the American people: I've nominated a fantastic Justice to replace the late, great Justice Scalia. His name is Judge Neil Gorsuch. And he comes from my list of 20 very, very highly qualified judges. He's an incredible, and he has an incredible résumé. He's respected by all. His education is as good as it can get. His writings are truly amazing. He will be a true defender of our Constitution.

And let me just say, tomorrow we're all going to meet, we're going to discuss the issues tomorrow, but the one thing we all agree on—all of us Governors and this administration, what every Governor wants—we want good jobs. We want a good economy. We want the world-class education system in our respective States. We want a health care delivery system that works, with great, quality health care, efficiently at a low cost. We want people to get on our roads and our rail and be able to ride around efficiently and then go see their kids play a ballgame. That's what we all want.

And, very importantly, we are going to work to restore local control to our Nation's education system. Betsy is here someplace, and she is going to be, I think, fantastic. I think she's going to be fantastic. Stand up, Betsy. Betsy feels so strongly, and she has had such support from so many people. You know, you don't see that too much because you see the anti, you never see the positive. But I can tell you, I've had so many calls while she was going through that horrible process. That was a tough, tough, nasty process. And she hung in, she was as strong as you get. But so many people were calling Betsy, saying you will do such a fantastic job once you get it.

It's like sometimes I'd say, it's much tougher to get into Harvard than it is to stay there. Does that make sense? [Laughter] It's tougher to get into the Wharton School of Finance—you can't get in. But if you get in, it's fine, you get through, right? I think you're going to do a fantastic job, and we're very proud of you. And you took a lot of heat, but you're going to do great. So she wants to bring decisionmaking powers back to parents, back to the families, and back to the States, where they can really control education.

Education has the power to uplift. It has the power to transform. And, perhaps most important, education has the power to create greater equality and justice in our lives.
With this Executive order, we will make HBCUs a priority in the White House—an absolute priority. A lot of people are going to be angry that they're not a priority, but that's okay. [Laughter] And we will pledge our support to you, your mission, and our shared mission of bringing education and opportunity to all of our people.
But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind and the souls of every American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time. I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African American and Latino children. These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious, or home school that is right for them.

And Bishop Noonan, thank you so much. A very powerful man, and I—the most powerful man, right? [Laughter] And I appreciate it very much for your uplifting prayer. I have to say that your support of schools like St. Andrews Catholic School has been incredible. Everyone talks about it. They talk about you. You understand how much the students benefit from full education, one that enriches both the mind and the soul—it's a combination—and that's a good combination.

So I'm grateful to have everybody here today. I'm also very pleased and—where is Rick Scott? Right over here, Governor Scott and Senator Marco Rubio and, as you know, Secretary DeVos—she was approved a couple of weeks ago. And she's the one that we all report to when it comes to education. And I know you're going to have a fantastic relationship with the Secretary, and that's going to be a lot of good things for your school and for the entire system.

St. Andrews Catholic School represents one of the many parochial schools dedicated to the education of some of our Nation's most disadvantaged children. But they're becoming just the opposite very rapidly through education and with the help of the school choice programs. This month, we commemorate the thousands of peaceful activists for justice who joined Martin Luther King on the march from Selma to Montgomery. On that day, Reverend King hoped that inferior education would become, as he said, quote, "a thing of the past." And we're going to work very much for the future and what he predicted would be the future. As I've often said in my address to Congress and just about anyplace else I can speak, education is the civil rights issue of our time. And it's why I've asked Congress to support a school choice bill. And we've come a long way. I think we really—we're right out there and we're ahead of—we're ahead of schedule in so many ways when it comes to education. And, again, Betsy is going to lead that—you're going to lead that charge, right?

Secretary of Commerce Wilbur L. Ross, Jr. Our hope is that today we really come with a way forward, some specific programs where we can interact between the educational community, the business community, and the Government. Because this is a monumental problem that needs a monumental solution.
Ivanka M. Trump. Thank you. And welcome, Chancellor, and to the many U.S. and German CEOs who are here today to discuss vocational education and workforce development. I applaud my father's commitment to creating millions of jobs and, specifically, making sure that all Americans have the skills required and necessary to fill the jobs both of today and of the future.
We have invested heavily in the further education and training and vocational training. It was round about $200 million in the last 5 years, and I can commit that we will invest another five—$200 million into training in the next 5 years. We are proud, as we are the biggest net exporter of vehicles in the United States. We have an annual net bill of $10 billion, cars exported from South Carolina. Seventy percent of our production is being exported. And I'm proud to be here, because we have one apprentice who's with us from—we have two main programs at Plant Spartanburg, a BMW Scholar Program, which was founded in 2011 and has round about 100 people in the program, and they graduate and create—get a great job at BMW. And we are very proud on their skill set; we need them for maintenance jobs.
Vice President Michael R. Pence. Thank you, Mr. President. And let me just express my appreciation, along with the President, for the participants in this important conversation. All the businesses that are gathered here from across the United States and across Germany are an inspiration, in the innovation that you're bringing to career and technical and vocational education and to apprenticeships.
And lastly, let me just thank the President. As a former Governor from a great manufacturing State, I can tell you that one of our very first conversations was about the innovation that Indiana was bringing to career and technical and vocational education. I can assure you that the passion that you see at this table today by the President is authentic, and at his direction, we're going to work as an administration to strengthen the opportunities from secondary education on forward to open the doors for more vocational education, more technical education, and more apprenticeships across the United States to the betterment of the people of this country. And we look forward to working with our international partners to drive greater opportunities for Americans.
The President's commitment to cutting regulations, cutting taxes, investing in priorities like infrastructure and education, and repealing and replacing the failed Obamacare is getting America moving again. As we find new—renewed strength at home, our friends abroad will find us to be even a stronger ally. The President knows just how important our enduring allies are, and Greece is no exception. That is truly why it is such an incredible honor, on this day as a Greek American, to introduce to you, the 45th President of the United States. Ladies and gentleman, President Donald J. Trump.

Ms. Funegra. We got together a little more than 10 days ago through the United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, and I'm proud to represent immigrants and Hispanics today. I'm also an immigrant. I moved from Peru 10 years ago to work in international development for a multilateral organization here. And I also quit my job and used my savings to start La Cocina VA, which is "the kitchen." It's an organization that provides vocational and technical education and jobs to unemployed and underemployed immigrant women, in partnership with local governments, with higher education institutions, with private sector, and help this population to start businesses.
So when Lisa mentioned how important it is to make our dreams come true, I have a unique position: I help others make their dreams come true with vocational education, empowering women to believe in the possibility of success and open businesses. So the model that we are ready to replicate now in other cities and in other communities integrates governments, integrates private sector, and all the power and resources that that represents in order to really make impactful results in our communities. And we're—low-income communities. Thank you, President.
I come from a small town in South Jersey. My aunt is a teacher, and she taught me the importance of education. My uncle is a firefighter. He taught me the importance of law and order. I went to a private high school. I was a cheerleader. I went to college, where I joined a sorority. After I left college, I had an injury and was prescribed pain killers, and so quickly, it took off from there. I didn't know anything about heroin. I was never warned, not that it's anybody else's fault; I take full responsibility.

But we've also at the DEA now turned to education, prevention. We talk about those things all the time. I want folks to know, if I may, sir, we do a national take-back program twice a year. The next one is on April 29, and people can drop off at 5,000 sites around the country—courtesy of DEA and our local partners—anything in their medicine cabinet that they don't want. Last year, we took in 1.6 million pounds of stuff. It includes everything.

So as we look at the pace of change, we look at the digital transformation we all see in business and the marketplace, and we look at the skills that we—this disconnect between what employers need and what our students coming into our workforces are prepared to deliver. And it would be great to get your thoughts on the priorities of the administration around education, around, again, what I like to call not the future of work, but the work of the future. Because the future of work sounds a little ominous, but the work of the future actually sounds pretty visionary.

The President. Okay, so before you sit, so you're giving me numbers from New York. You're a proud New Yorker, but you're giving me numbers—why is it doing so badly? Tell me. Why is—why are the numbers so horrific in terms of education? And what happens when somebody goes through school and then they can't read after the—they graduate from high school, and they can barely read. So what's the answer?

If you look at so many elements of education, and it's so sad to see what's coming—what's happening in the country. Even the numbers, as good—you say we're doing better, but the numbers in New York, the numbers in Chicago, are very rough. The numbers in Los Angeles—the cities, it's a very rough situation. Common Core—I mean, we have to bring education more local. We can't be managing education from Washington. When I go out to Iowa, when I go out to the different States and I talk, they want to run their school programs locally, and they'll do a much better job than somebody—and look, these are some very good people in Washington, but you also have bureaucrats that make a lot of money and don't really care that much about what they're doing or about the community that they have never seen and they'll never meet and they never will see.

And I like the fact of getting rid of—Common Core to me is—we have to end it. We have to bring education local. To me, I've always said it; I've been saying it during the campaign. And we're doing it. Betsy DeVos is—she's doing a terrific job, highly respected, tremendous track record. But she's got one of the toughest jobs of any of our Secretaries, to me. She's got one of the toughest jobs. There's some pretty tough jobs out there, but she's got one of the toughest jobs.

We're going to spend a lot of money and a lot of expertise. We're going to have great talent having to do with education, because there's nothing more important than education. And we've got to get those numbers in New York better, and I think they will be better. And a lot of people—a lot of the greatest people I know in New York, they're totally in love, including Ivanka and Jared, they're so much involved, and it's so important to them, the word "education." And it's happening, and I see it happening in New York very much.

We've been looking at trade, education and workforce development, energy and the environment, regulatory reform, and infrastructure. All these things are really important, and we're focused. The people in the administration are also focused. And working together, hopefully we'll have a bunch of really good outcomes.

I'm excited to be joined today by students from Gateway Technical College. And remember the college president, Bryan Albrecht. Thank you. Great job. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, Bryan. Your partnership with Snap-on is a great example of why vocational education is the way of the future.

For too long, the Federal Government has imposed its will on State and local governments. The result has been education that spends more and achieves far, far, far less. My administration has been working to reverse this Federal power grab and give power back to families, cities, States—give power back to localities.
Secretary of Education Elisabeth P. DeVos. So it has been all of our experience, that those closest to the problem are best equipped to solve it. That means empowering parents, teachers, State and local leaders, not the Federal Government. Time and time again, we've seen that one-size-fits-all policies and mandates from Washington simply don't work. We can't have a cookie-cutter approach to education. Each State and each school have different challenges, and each individual student has unique needs.
So I thank the President for signing this Executive order and for his commitment to an education policy that puts students first. It's my honor now to introduce the Governor of the great State of Nevada, Brian Sandoval.
Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, my fellow Governors, Representatives, teachers, educators: It really is a privilege and honor to be with you all today. You know, in my home State of Nevada, I often say that what happens in our schools today will determine the future of our great State. And Mr. President, I know that your action today will empower every State to improve our delivery of education. Most importantly, it will allow Governors across the Nation to ensure that all States serve all students from all backgrounds.
Now, as the incoming chair of the National Governors Association, I know that the Governors will collectively continue to act as the national voice on federalism. And as the leaders of education in our States, we look forward to working with this administration to ensure our role is reflected in Federal policy.
The President. Thank you. It's education for North Korea. [Laughter] I like education.
Gov. Sandoval. This is even better than I hoped for, Mr. President. [Laughter] The Every Student Succeeds Act embodies the vision you have for education and the limited role of the Federal Government.
In all things, we are returning power to the people where it belongs. We're going to defend the Second Amendment and your right to keep and bear arms. We are going to bring education local, and we are going to end Common Core. We are going to stop Federal overreach and defend the God-given rights of every American family.

We are also celebrating all of the Americans who learn the skills and trades that generations of workers have used to build, shape, and supply this Nation. The people who construct, repair, and create with their own two hands are the people who make this Nation run. And lots of those people voted for me. That's also why, in my administration, I'm so deeply committed to technical and vocational education.

As a vote of confidence in these policies, business optimism is soaring, and employment is rising. These are great signs for America's future, the future that our new graduates will play with such a critical role in shaping our world and our country. I want every young citizen, regardless of education or geography, to be able to live out their American dreams.

From the most humble roots you've become a powerhouse in both education and sports. And just wait until the world hears the football teams you'll be playing on your schedule starting next season. President Falwell gave me a list of some of those schools, the ones you're going to be playing 2018. Would you like me to read the names? Just came out, would you like to hear them? I'm a little bit concerned. UMass, Virginia, Auburn — Jerry, are you sure you know what you're doing? Jerry, Auburn? I don't know about that James. This could be trouble, Jerry. Rutgers, Old Dominion, Brigham Young, Army — I might be at that game, who am I supposed to root for? Tell me. I don't know. That's a tough one, Jerry. I don't know, Jerry, I'm going to have to think about that one, Jerry. Buffalo, Troy, Virginia Tech, oh no, Jerry, Ole Miss and wake forest, those are really top schools. maybe in four or five years I'll come to a game, right, you'll build it up. Well good luck.

At the same time, we have had significant progress for our citizens on issues such as education, housing, health, and social services. Millions of Colombians have been lifted out of poverty. Today, we continue next to you as partners in Peace Colombia to consolidate peace in the most affected areas. With the robust support of your Government, we are removing thousands of antipersonnel mines that murdered and mutilated children, women, and soldiers. We are healing the wounds of our victims, and we are embarking on a big social development program.

Our shared agenda, framed within a high-level dialogue that we Colombians value so much, includes cooperation which has allowed us to have unprecedented progress towards quality education for everyone. And this is a priority in the policies of my Government, and we wish to do more with regards to innovation and technology.

Romanians have made contributions to the United States and to the world. Very notable among them was Nobel Prize laureate Elie Wiesel, who was born in Romania and, sadly, passed away almost 1 year ago. And I understand that earlier this week, the American Jewish Committee presented President Iohannis with its very prestigious Light Unto the Nations Award for his work to further Holocaust remembrance and education in Romania. I join the AJC in saluting your leadership in that vital cause.

Secretary of Education Elisabeth P. DeVos. Mr. President, it's a privilege to serve, to serve the students of this country, and to work to ensure that every child has an equal opportunity to get a great education and, therefore, a great future.

I'm also thrilled to be joined by Secretary of Labor Alexander Acosta. Thank you, Alex. And Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos. We're here today at Waukesha County Technical College to discuss one of the most important questions facing our young people: how to get education and training that they need to find a rewarding and high-paying job.

Every American deserves a path to a great job that they truly love. That begins with the right education, one that gives students the foundation for a lifetime of success. Every day, as your President, I will be committed to this goal.

Our Embassy remains open in the hope that our countries can forge a much stronger and better path. America believes that free, independent, and sovereign nations are the best vehicle for human happiness, for health, for education, for safety, for everything. We all accept that all nations have the right to chart their own paths—and I'm certainly a very big believer in that—so we will respect Cuban sovereignty. But we will never turn our backs on the Cuban people. That will not happen.
For the past 2 weeks, my administration has been working extensively on vocational education, infrastructure, and technology. Here, at this great facility, we've just seen fantastic examples of how vocational training in new technologies can help make American farming even more productive so we can compete and win, win, win on the world stage.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

My administration will do everything possible to provide our children, especially kids in underserved areas, with access to high-quality education in science, technology, engineering, and math. You're a good math student?
Participant. Better STEM education also means higher paying jobs for American workers and families. You get out of school, you get great—really great—jobs, high-paying jobs. And we're doing very well with the employment rolls today. You get really good jobs. And we want our amazing young Americans to fill these jobs, earn a great living, lift up their communities, and achieve their American dreams.
The directives I am sharing today, with Secretary DeVos at the helm, to make STEM education, including computer science, a priority for the Department of Education. Is that right, Betsy?
The department will explore ways to add or increase computer science to existing K-12—and K-through-12 and postsecondary education programs. It also establishes a goal of devoting at least 200—listen to this number—$200 million each year in grants toward funding this priority. So that's $200 million a year. Does that sound like big bucks?
Representative Lamar S. Smith. Mr. President, thank you. I'm chairman of the Science Committee in the House, and I just want to thank the President for giving a priority to STEM education and to computer science in particular.
The President. So education—thanks, Ivanka.
The President. And education is just so important at every level, whether it's this or whatever you study. And always remember this: Do what you love. Study what you love. You parents may want you to do something—and you should always listen to your parents—but try to focus on the things that you love, whether it's in studies or when you get out of school. Do what you love, and you're going to be successful. Work hard, all of those things—but you have to follow your heart to a certain extent and maybe even to a large extent.
Those are our aspirations. I think we can talk about that in the education sector, in the health care sector. And those are all of our aspirations. We are confident that within this group we will start addressing those poignant, short-term needs, but also talking about the long road ahead working together, working together with your administration.

We're going to reduce income tax rates for individuals, increase the child tax credit, and extend it to more middle-income families, a far larger group; repeal the alternative minimum tax; end the estate tax, or the death tax, as it's commonly called; retain tax incentives for mortgages, charitable contributions, work, higher education, retirement savings. We have a lot things that are the important generators in our economy.
But for the taxes: They want to see tax cuts. They want to see jobs. They want to have choice. You know, in education we talk about choice. Well, we want choice in jobs also. So you can look for five jobs or six jobs, not just take one because that's all you could get. And that's happening more and more.

But I'm going to do something better than that. We're going to have choice. Now, we have choice in education now. We're starting that, right? And I thought of it the other day. We're going to have choice in jobs so that you don't have one job and hang on, even though you don't like it. You're going to have choice, where you can take five jobs, six jobs, seven jobs, pick the one you like at the most money. That's what's starting to happen, because the jobs are coming in. That's what's starting to happen.

Students like James Meredith, who were persecuted for standing up for their right to the same education as every other American student. Young people, like the nine brave students who quietly sat. And they sat very stoically, but very proudly, at the Jackson Public Library in 1961. And by the way, I would add the word "very bravely"—they sat very bravely.

You know, in education, we're talking choice. Well, in jobs, we're going to be talking choice too, because right now people go for one job and they don't have many options. They're going to have plenty of options. They're going to look at 5, 6, 7 jobs, and they're going to pick the one they want. And wages are starting to go up. First time in many years, wages now are actually starting to go up. So we have a lot of great things happening, but what really is something that, I think, will really be the capper is going to be the massive tax cuts that we're planning that, hopefully, within a very short period of time, we'll have signed into law.

Vice President Pence. We truly do believe that there are opportunities after our discussions this weekend for bipartisan work on a broad range of issues from infrastructure to workforce to vocational education. And I can say, I'm even more confident, after this weekend's discussions, that, with the President's leadership and with the strong leadership in the Congress, we're going to keep delivering for the American people in 2018 and we're going to create a stronger and more prosperous America.

Rep. Hoyer. I want to follow up on that. There are no Democrats that don't want to make sure that the military is funded properly. And over the last 4 years, we had an agreement between Mr. Ryan and Senator Murray—Speaker Ryan and—that we understand that our military is critically important. But we also understand that our domestic issues, whether it's education, whether it's health care, whether it's the environment, whether it's transportation and infrastructure, they're important, as well.

The President. Yes. Go ahead. Sen. Brown. Eleven people a day, in my State of Ohio, die from opioid overdose. This is an important bill. The next step is that we actually provide dollars to communities so we can scale up treatment. But we woefully underfund education, prevention, and treatment programs. The waiting lists are too long. That's the importance of Medicaid. That's the importance, frankly, the Affordable Care Act. That's the importance of funding local communities so that they can do what they need to do to deal with the terrible addiction that so many families face.

Over the last 15 years, Room at the Inn has provided housing, childcare, counseling, education, and job training to more than 400 women. Even more importantly, it has given them hope. It has shown each woman that she is not forgotten, that she is not alone, and that she really now has a whole family of people who will help her succeed.

Kernen: Do you have a way of addressing the skills gap and education? As a businessperson, you solve problems. Now you're in government ...

One of Staub's employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where he trained to become a welder. Like many hard-working Americans, Corey plans to invest his tax cut raise into his new home and his two daughters' education. Corey, please stand. And he's a great welder. [Laughter] I was told that by the man that owns that company that's doing so well. So congratulations, Corey.

Here are the four pillars of our plan: The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by their parents at a young age. That covers almost three times more people than the previous administration covered. Under our plan, those who meet education and work requirements and show good moral character will be able to become full citizens of the United States over a 12-year period.

So my son Zaire Kelly went to—college-bound—right after school, to announce that he was declaring for his college to run track and to further his education and become mayor of District of Columbia or something like that.

However, at our school, just a solution, we actually have checkpoints. When a student walks in the door, we actually have metal detectors. And I oftentimes see that in urban education. And we actually have an x-ray machine that students put their bags through. And extremely—right after this incident happened, a parent who didn't so much agree with it at first, sent me an e-mail saying: "Thank you. Because now I see exactly what's happening."

Today we're here with State and local leaders, law enforcement officers, and education officials to discuss how we can make our schools safe and our communities secure. And no better time to discuss it than right now. And I think we're making a lot of progress, and I can tell you there are—there's a tremendous feeling that we want to get something done. And we're leading that feeling, I hope. But there's a great feeling, including at the NRA, including with Republican Senators and, hopefully, Democrat Senators and Congressmen.
One of those areas is education. What can we do better to assist educators and parents and first responders on dealing with serious mental illness situations? Second is, what can we do around screening and identification of those at risk for serious mental illness? The third is treatment, both preventive treatment for those who are recently diagnosed, but also those who are an imminent risk of danger to themselves or others. And that might involve involuntary issues. As talked about earlier, how can we be of assistance there to get people the care that they need to live fruitful and good lives, but also be safe.
Commissioner of Education Pam Stewart of Florida. Mr. President, I'm Pam Stewart. I'm the commissioner of education for the great State of Florida.
I do see that there is a huge pool of retired law enforcement officers where municipalities and counties have actually invested a lot of money into training them, and now they're retired. And often, because they are receiving a public retirement, they cannot go back into that similar kind of retirement plan. If they go into an educational plan, they can actually work for a school, be trained. The school doesn't have to train them. But, also, they can learn and figure out where cameras and different security pieces need to be implemented within the schools, because of their experience and training.
But I think most of the solutions are going to come from the States. We have some States that are doing things with arming personnel inside the school system that they seem to think is working well. I know I'm working with my legislature, as recently as last night, in talking about what is the cost for education. What is the cost—you're a businessman—to do business.
Ms. Mims. Recently, I noticed an increased amount of my take-home pay. What that means for me, personally, is an opportunity to reinvest, or invest, in my daughter's college education, and give her the opportunities that I had.

College of the Ozarks President Jerry C. Davis. Mr. President, I'd like to introduce my staff members that I brought with me. But first of all, I want to thank you for taking a leadership role in making America work again. That's been a big task, and we in higher education appreciate your efforts and probably don't say that enough.

Mr. Muilenberg. An example, right here in Missouri, where we have a metal forming vocational school. Collaborative work, including Boeing, as well as higher education, on creating these training programs, where students can come out of high school, go into this vocational training, and in 2 years be qualified aerospace metal builders to aerospace standards.

Mr. Muilenberg. Yes, I think it's a place where partnerships make good sense, in some cases, with higher education. But having industry involved is important, because we know the endpoint of use, and we can do training that's very practical and could lead immediately to jobs.

Mr. Farrell. Sir, last month, we opened for the first time a 529 account. Previously, these accounts could only be used to spend on college education. With the changes to the tax law, we can now spend it with St. Joe, for our kids' K-through-12 education.

Mr. Farrell. It's a great benefit to us. We know a lot of families that are taking advantage of it as well. So we appreciate that change to the tax law that allows us to save and invest in those accounts and spend it on their K-through-12 education at St. Jo.

The President. Well, I want to thank our great military leaders. This was an education. We're talking about drugs and stopping these drugs and other things: human trafficking and so many other forms of trafficking.

But I just want to thank everybody. That was an incredible education, and we are behind you all the way. Thank you very much.
Mandy took her passion for education from the Peace Corps to Joel E. Ferris High School in Spokane, Washington, where she has been teaching English and math for the past 6 years. Her incredible devotion has earned her the adoration—total adoration, actually—and respect of students and colleagues throughout her school district, community, and the entire State.

You remember, I'd come into big rooms, big audiences, and I'd say, what do you have to lose? Because the Democrats have always had that vote. I said, what do you have to lose? Horrible on crime. Horrible on education. Horrible on everything. I say, what do you have to lose? And they voted for me, and we won. But now the numbers are much higher than they ever were with African American—but we're happy.

Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
I said, "Wait a minute. When you pass the tax reform act of whatever year, nobody knows it's tax cuts." "Well, I think they do." Great, let's give everybody an education. We're going to give 350 million people an education. You got to call it the Tax Cut Act. The Tax Cut Act. [applause]
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
And I got a little education. I asked the Admiral, "When that big monster is coming in"—in this case, to Texas. And it was coming in. They've never seen a water dump like that, I think, in history, in terms of water coming down. And it would come in, go out. Come in, go out. Three times, four times. There's never been anything like it. And his guys and gals, they just followed that thing back and forth. And you were all over it.

Unemployment claims are at a 44-year low. That's a great number. Maybe the one that makes me happiest is this—because I remember, I'd go around, I'd say: "What do you have to lose? Vote for me. The Democrats have always been with you. Vote for me." They've—you know, bad education. The most unsafe parts of the country. All of these different—I'd say to the African Americans, I'd say: "What you have to do? What do you have to do? Vote for me. What do you have to lose?"

But not only does that affect, as everyone knows, the defense and everything that is—goes along with it, but those mining leases contribute billions of dollars to our school trust funds for the K-through-12 education system for the entire State. So without that, we don't have that money for the school trust funds as well.

So I've worked with so many of you on different programs within your State that ensure that people have the skills, training, the vocational education they need to fill those jobs. And we have a lot more great work that's going to be coming out of this White House in collaboration with each of you.

Gov. Otter. So I created another community college. So every portal of education, every portal of skilled development for the needs of our workforce we're creating. And right now our—my workforce is over 850,000. It was less than 700,000 when I became Governor.

Finally, since Secretary Acosta is here and we're talking about workforce development, these go hand in hand. We have 6.7 million unfilled available jobs right now. Many people are failing the drug tests, and we're trying to treat the whole person. This is why, in addition to DHS and DOJ and the VA and, obviously, HHS, we've involved in our opioids Cabinet activity HUD and Department of Labor so that we're treating the whole person, connecting them with the skills training, the education, the opportunities they need, if they are fortunate enough to go through drug court programs or treatment and recovery programs.

Representative Thomas J. Cole. Mr. President, first, thank you for having us. Thank you for your leadership. I think probably all of us around this table would say defense is the number-one priority, the number-one bill. It's probably the only reason why you signed the omnibus. But I think I'm actually sitting next to the other—the key to getting defense. We know for us as Republicans, defense is number one. Quite honestly, for Democrats, labor, health and human services, and education tend to be number one.

And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
That bonus will help support the education of her two sons, Cameron and Christian. Pretty good, right? [Applause] Pretty good. So we're so happy for your family, and I know your sons are going to make you very proud. They're great young men. And, LaSonya, please, would you say a few words? Please.

Ms. Hill. Thank you, Mr. President, for the invite. It's an honor to be here today. As you said, Crowley Maritime was able to benefit from the tax reform by paying employees bonuses. And in return, my family, we were able to invest in our children's education. So——

We will hear from Ivanka, from Secretary Acosta, Secretary Ross, Secretary DeVos, and Administrator McMahon about important actions we're taking in partnership with the private sector and State and local governments to expand vocational education, career and technical training, and on-the-job training.

Secretary Acosta. That's right, Mr. President. I was—I was out in Las Vegas about 3 weeks ago. I was visiting with Jon Ponder, who spoke in the Rose Garden here, who runs Prisoners for Hope—a reentry program. And he—and his program goes into the prisons and works with individuals, in cooperation with the prison system and the district attorney, to provide skills and education before someone leaves the prison.

President Trump's new Executive order now creates the National Council for American Workers to look at systematic issues that span our entire education and training system. It also establishes a new American Workforce Policy Advisory Board to be housed at the Department of Commerce. We will raise awareness of the job opportunities that are available for skilled American workers. We will recognize the companies and organizations that are successfully closing the skills gap. I look forward to chairing this new Council with Secretary Acosta, Andrew Bremberg, and Ivanka Trump, and working with all the members of the Council and with the American Workforce Policy Advisory Board.

As we know, when we look at our K-12 system and of those young people coming up, our country has fallen behind our international competitors. Today, in our PISA scores, we are 23d in reading, 25th in science, and 40th in math. We have significant opportunity to improve things for young people. And there's a—there's essentially a fundamental disconnect between education today and the preparation of our young people and today's economy and the opportunities there.

I'm thrilled and honored to be here today to launch the National Council for the American Worker. Joining us for the announcement is Secretary Wilbur Ross—Secretary—good; Secretary Alex Acosta; Betsy DeVos—everybody knows, education; Acting Secretary Peter O'Rourke—Peter, great job you're doing; Director Mulvaney, who has worked so hard—those budgets, but they're coming along, right? [Laughter] Right, Mick? Linda McMahon—Administrator, Small Business. Thank you Linda. Jared—fantastic job. Chris—incredible. What a group; this group. Nobody knows Kellyanne—nobody knows. [Laughter] All stand up. Fantastic job, Andrew. Thank you. Please stand up. Really great. Thank you.

But to keep this momentum going, to continue this economic miracle—and that's what it is, it's a miracle what's happened in the last year and a half—we must invest in job training and vocational education. And the fact is that companies are pouring back into our country—companies that, frankly, left 10 and 20 years ago, and they're coming back. And we need people to work for those companies. We need talented people. We need people with training.

In that spirit, I'm proud to announce an exciting new challenge and the beginning of a new national movement. We're asking businesses and organizations across the country to sign our new pledge to America's workers. Today 23 companies and associations are pledging to expand apprenticeships. That's an interesting word for me to be saying. Right? "The Apprentice." [Laughter] I never actually put that together until just now. That—that was a good experience, I will tell you that. [Laughter] Isn't that strange? Ivanka, I never associated—but here we are. Can't get away from that word. [Laughter] That's a great word. For on the job training and vocational education.

Mr. Noel. And through our Home Builders Institute, our educational arm, we pledge to do—prepare 50,000 new workers to work at building the American Dream.

The President. Thank you. Thank you. United Parcel Service Chief Transformation Officer Scott Price. Mr. President, my name is Scott Price. I'm pleased to represent UPS, where we are committing to 51,750 new roles through higher education and apprenticeships.

Last year, I signed legislation—it's amazing, I just said, "last year." It's been a long time already, hasn't it? That was some campaign, wasn't it? I signed legislation so that veterans can use their GI bill education benefits at any point in their lifetime. It's a big difference. They never expire, so vets can get the education they need when it is right for them.

Assistant to the President Trump. Absolutely. So after many, many years—since 2006—Congress, on both sides of the aisle, could not get together to reauthorize and modernize a piece of legislation that is so critically important to what we're all here talking about: career and technical education.

Assistant to the President Ivanka M. Trump. ——and it's an enormous piece of legislation, and it's going to be really transformative to education across the country.

Mr. Wee. I just want to say thank you for really looking at the Perkins legislation. In fact, I just read it this morning. Under the leadership of Representative Virginia Foxx, it says one of the priorities is to have more inclusive collaboration between educational institution, industry, employers, and community partners.

Rep. Blum. Well, that's the big points I wanted to make. And I just wanted to say, Mr. President, my parents had 10-grade educations, and I valued education, got an education, worked my butt off, and became a self-made entrepreneur who lived the American Dream. And I think this is all about the American Dream. Thank you very much.

And so that's where I think the State of Iowa and all of our employers are really stepping up to engage with education so that we can—you know, our population hasn't grown in quite some time here in the State. So it is important that we retrain the people that we have——

So last week in the White House, we saw almost—we saw companies make commitments to provide educational opportunities and apprenticeships to almost 4 million American workers. And today I was handed this when I walked in. Here in Iowa, because of the Governor's work, businesses have come together. You heard from Hy-Vee, and you just heard from Randy and some others—businesses have come together. And they've already pledged 50,000 training opportunities because of Governor Reynolds's work to Iowans. And that's transformative to each and every one of those lives.

Secretary Acosta. And so the point that I want to make is a very simple one: Whether it's through tax cuts; through deregulation; through job opportunities for individuals that are looking to transition careers; through educational opportunities for community colleges; through the Perkins CTE; for veterans that are looking for quality health care through association health plans, the rules that we just proposed that are going to drop health care costs for associations around the Nation—and I know here, I heard this morning that some groups in Iowa are already putting those associations together—that is impacting lives. Those aren't just theories. That is impacting American lives across this Nation. And it's pretty incredible that that has happened in, in essence, about a year and a half. And so I just wanted to reflect on that. Thank you.

I also signed legislation allowing veterans to use their GI bill education benefits at any point during their lifetimes. We established the promised White House VA hotline, which we have working right now. Every VA medical center offers same-day emergency mental health care as well. We have greatly expanded telehealth and walk-in clinics, and we are processing veterans' disability claims more quickly, by far, than ever before.

We're also here to discuss a issue I feel very strongly about: vocational education. Whether you're a high school student or a late-career worker, there has never been a better time to learn a trade, hone a skill, or pursue your dreams. Never been a better time. We've never had a better time for hiring in this country.
And we can improve our education system by stopping Common Core, by . . . [applause] . . . By giving every child, regardless of circumstance, the ability to attend a good school, and by getting the Constitution back in our classrooms in a very big way. [applause]
And Brett Kavanaugh, highest education, best grades, best tests, best everything. They thought 15 years ago he was going to be a Supreme Court judge. Look at Justice Gorsuch, how good is he? How good is he?
Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community, surrounded by a loving family, with access to a great education that leads to a lifelong career and success and all of the things that go with great success.

And you've heard this but I'm going to say it over and over because I'm really proud of it: Remember I said, "What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose?" African-Americans and so many others, I said, "What do you have to lose? You have high crime rates. You have horrible education. You have this"--I went through a list of 10, that's what happened. And I looked and I said, "You've been totally giving your votes to Democrats. They've let you down." I said, "What the hell do you have to lose?" [applause]
We've passed the FIRST STEP Act through the House, and we're working very hard in the Senate to refine it and pass it into law. We think we'll be successful in that regard. The bill expands vocational educational programs to eligible Federal inmates so that more of them can learn a trade. And that's what we're doing. We're teaching them trades. We're teaching them different things so that they can put into good use and put into use to get jobs.

We want every child to grow up in a safe neighborhood surrounded by families that are loving and helpful and with a path to great education and a lifelong career.

Gov. Burgum. But you know, in the end, we're trying to create better neighbors, not better prisoners. Ninety-eight-and-a-half percent of the people that go to prison in North Dakota end up coming back out. And so we have to—when they're there, like the other Governors have talked about it, it's education, it's career skills, it's treatment. Those are things we have to focus on. If we can do that, we can turn people's lives around and add people to the workforce. We know we need that, because we've got so many jobs open in this country.

And I thought Ryan was great this morning. So before we start on a couple of other things we'll be discussing today, including, very importantly, schools and education, I would ask you to give maybe a little recap of what you said this morning on television.

Today Education Secretary Betsy DeVos and others and various Commission leaders will provide an update on their work. We're going to have a lot of people in this room involved, even people that aren't involved that much with education. But they're very smart people sitting around this wonderful desk, or table.

Secretary Azar, Nielsen, and Sessions—a lot of other people are being—joining. A lot of people have asked me if they could join. Ben—Ben Carson is one. A lot of people have asked me if they could join. They consider the schools to be so important in education and now so important in safety.

Keeping guns—we want to keep them out of the hands of those who pose a threat to themselves and to, more importantly, frankly, others. And we want to foster a culture that celebrates life, and forms real and meaningful human connection so that we can see not only in terms of education, but we can see if something is going wrong with somebody, we can do something about it.

You know, with African American folks, I used to be at big rallies, and I'd read all of the problems. Highest crime, toughest areas, worst schools—all of these horrible, lowest—the worst homeownership of any group by far. And I was reading them just one after another. There were like 10 pieces, and every one was a horror show, but especially anything having to do with crime and education.
Acting Director Carroll. And so thank you for allowing me—you told me, at the beginning, to be relentless. And you meant it across all three: to be help with—relentless on education and prevention, relentless on making sure people get treatment, and of course, be relentless on interdiction and on stopping the drugs.

On my dad's side, he wasn't encouraged to go to school. He has an eighth-grade education. And the life that my parents made for themselves—my dad is a maintenance man for the local school system, and I'm proud of him.

Mr. Hughett. And my mother is a teacher with three degrees. And my entire life, my dad has pushed me and encouraged me to get an education, and my mom has taught me how to use it. And I have to tell you, without—if a coalition like STAND had existed when they were children, their lives would have been way different. And I will not stop advocating for my county until every child has had the same opportunities that I've been blessed with.

And I remember and you remember when I used to go . . . and I'd go to a big arena like this, bigger. This is a pretty big one, I must say. Oh, by the way, if they write tomorrow, "The enthusiasm in the room was wanting," you know, they're like, "wanting." See, you have to understand, I have a better education than they do from a much better school, but . . . the elite. They're the elite. They're the elite. [applause]
You've heard me say this many times. I'm very proud of it. Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose?" Because I'd read these horrible statistics—highest crime, worst education, all the bad things; lowest homeownership—about African Americans. And they've always voted for Democrats. Not all, but a big proportion.

In this context of pursuing and consolidating our bilateral relations, we shall concentrate our efforts to the fields of trade and increased investment, along with our cooperation in the military, energy, and education fields. I'm pleased to invite United States corporations to participate in development and infrastructure projects in the state of Kuwait and to invest therein according to the Kuwait laws and regulations attractive to investments.

What happens, I said, if the entire world decides to go to California, because they get free health care, free medical care, and free education? California has just increased in size to 500 million people. California has just become one really large person. California--think of it. He says, I want to open the border, I want everyone to come in, at the same time for illegal aliens and illegal immigrants. Lot of different names. He wants to get rid of us.
He wants to cut down on law enforcement. And he wants to pay for their medical, their health care, and their education. But I really asked--look, it's all about common sense, right? I think I won because of common sense. And because . . . like you, like you, you, me, we're smart, we're really smart. But I said to myself, just common sense, everyone is going to come in. I may even move to California to get free health care. [laughter]
The task of the Council is to develop a national strategy to ensure that all American students and workers have access to affordable results-driven education, preparing them to fill the jobs of the future and to make a great, great living; to make, frankly, more money than they've ever made before and to enjoy their job more than they've ever done before. It's very exciting.

In this mission, we are partnering with the private sector to identify the most innovative on-the-job training programs that will provide our citizens with the skills that they need to thrive and to grow. We believe in vocational education, very important word. I've asked to be—to have that word brought back. When I was young, I remember seeing schools—they were called "vocational schools," where people that had great talent at mechanical things, fixing engines and laying brick and plumbing and electricity and electric. These were incredibly talented people. People going to college with me didn't have their talent for that and never would have their talent for that.

So vocational is very important, and these are some of the best jobs in our country. So we believe in vocational education. We believe in lifelong learning. And we believe in saving taxpayer dollars while producing greater results for our workers. That is having the private sector train millions and millions of people for future jobs. Because it's different; jobs are much different today than they were even 10 years ago.

What do you have to lose? What do you have to lose? Remember? Ha. Remember, I said, what do you have to lose? People said, oh, that's not nice. I said, hey, I go through a chart, it talked about the highest crime rates, the worst education, the worst homeownership. I'd go through--and I just looked up one night and I said, you've always been with the Democrats. Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose? Remember that, right? Right?[applause]
How about this clown in California who's running for governor? Now, think--just think. We get a lot of people from California that moved here, but how about this guy? Wait. He announces he wants open borders, that means just pour in, and then he wants to give them health care, education, everything. You know what's going to happen? California is going to have a billion people within a very short period of time.
She wants to let everybody pour into our country. She wants to then give them health care. Next will be, let's also give them free education. Let's also--let's also hurt the State of Missouri and every other state.
You see what's going on in California. He wants to have open borders and everybody worldwide can pour into California, just pour in. And he's going to give you health care and education. You know what? That will be--I think California will end up being larger than the United States. The whole world is going to come. It's really bad stuff.
And they're going to take care of health care, they're going to take care of education, they're going to care of everything for people that just flow in. You're going to have a billion people living in California. It's going to be a mess.
The President. Thanks, Steve. Thank you, Steve. Great job. We want to give every citizen the opportunity to achieve their American Dream. That's why we're committed to expanding apprenticeships and on-the-job-training and vocational education, you know, a word that you don't hear that much. I'm bringing it back. Because when I was growing up, I had so many vocational schools, and you don't hear that anymore.

My administration is making a historic investment in workforce development. We established the National Council on the American Worker, and I recently signed a bill to provide more than $1 billion annually for vocational education.

Mr. Nickelaides. For me, my apprenticeship experience has been a pretty good one. When I went to get a job with Local 98, as a member of the Air Force National Guard, I told them that there'd be a good chance that I'd be deploying pretty often. And I told them that during my interview. And I really thank God for the opportunity that they still gave me to get a job and to train me in their union. So I thought that maybe it would be just words that I'd get from Local 98—that, yes, they support the military—but I didn't really know if I could believe it. But I was able to deploy for 3 months—short little deployment—and upon my return, I was able to get pushed right back into the education program with the Local 98. And I'm back working, upon arrival, back in the United States. And tomorrow I'm waking up at 4:20 and going back to work again. [Laughter]

So it's more important than any specific deal—anything—that we bring jobs into America, and that we provide a transition with mental health and the Amer-I-Can education curriculum that Jim has worked on. Larry Hoover also has a curriculum that he's worked on. We have Montessori curriculums that we worked on. WeWorks has a beautiful curriculum. The Waldorf establishment has a curriculum. We have meditation. There's a lot of things affecting our mental health that makes us do crazy things that puts us back into that trap door called the 13th Amendment.

And I think it would be cool to have Yeezy ideation centers, which would be a mix of education that empowers people and gives them modern information like—sometimes, people say: "This kid has ADD. This kid has ADD." He don't have ADD. School is boring. It was boring. It's not as exciting as this. We have to make it more exciting. We have to mix curriculums.

Secretary Zinke. I'd like to highlight the Southern Utes. This is an example of when you empower a great nation to do great things—they get free health care and free education. You know, and things are pretty tough out in Indian country, but when you empower a great people to do great things by deregulating and making sure that they're involved in decisionmaking—and many times, the sovereign—sovereignty should mean something—this is a great example of the empowerment and the ability to shape your own future in Indian Country. Bravo Zulu, Southern Utes.
But . . . but something nice about . . . doesn't have to be a judge, would you believe it? But I shook his hand, I'll never forget it. I shook his hand, and I said, Brett, you're like so good, educationally, you're a great scholar, you're talented, incredible wife, incredible daughters, your life has been amazing. Don't forget, six checks under the seventh from the FBI, flawless. I said, Brett, congratulations, this is going to be a piece of cake. [laughter]
Remember? Now they're starting the same thing. It's like a replay. Will he do well? Women, by the way, what do they want? They want security, both real security and economic security. They don't want to have criminals all over the place. They want to be able to have a great family and raise a great family. They want great education for their family and their kids.
Not a big point. That is not a good sound bite. How do they win an election? Do we really have an election here? Come to think of it, they want to take away your second amendment, they want to raise your taxes, they want to open your borders, let people in, illegally, and then they want to pay for those people for health care, education, they want to give them cars, the want to give them drivers licenses. [booing]
The Democrat plan to destroy American health care includes free health care and education to illegal aliens paid for by you, thank you very much, the American taxpayer. [booing]
To expand opportunity for all citizens, we are also focused on vocational education. To me, very important. It's very important. And I'm proud to have signed into law the Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act. That's a long name, but good name. And I love the name "vocational."

[At this point, several descriptions were read of private sector initiatives to reduce opioid addiction, improve education and recovery efforts, and enhance job training programs for recovering addicts.]
He wants open borders-- think of this, just think of this-- he wants open borders, everybody can come to California. And he wants to give you free health care, free education, driver's licenses. I said the other night jokingly probably a Rolls-Royce. And one of these people said, he said he's going to give them a Rolls-Royce. And he did not say that, the Governor never-- [laughter]
The President. Remember? Remember? Ben remembers that one. No, I'm making a speech, and I'm—I literally had like 20 points about how badly Black Americans are being treated, African Americans are being treated. And it was point after point: highest crime rate, highest this, worst household ownership, worst education—I'm reading these points—I'm reading them. And I had never seen them before; they were so bad. The crime was horrible in the African American communities.

So I'm reading these points. Every one of them is run by the Democrats, every one of those—every one. And so I'm reading: crime, worst education, worst median income—everything. Just point after point. Highest employment rate in the whole country by far. By the way, African American youth unemployment rate, like, 58 percent. Fifty-eight percent.

And they want to sign them up for free health care, free welfare, free education, and for the right to vote. They want to sign 'em for the right to vote. What's that all about? [booing]
You know, they say, are you a conservative? I say, yeah, I guess. But, you know, really what I am, I think have common sense. Most of this stuff is common sense. We need borders. We need borders. We need a great military. We want low taxes. We want great education.
To support incredible programs like the FFA, my administration is expanding apprenticeships—I love that word: "The Apprentice." [Laughter] Apprenticeships, on-the-job training, and vocational education.

We are providing more than $1 billion annually to keep vocational education and agriculture education in our public schools. How about that? Good music, good music. You're a hard crowd to figure. I thought that would be good, but I didn't see that as a standing—some of the ones that got a little applause, I thought that was going to be a—see, I just don't know the farm business, I guess. [Laughter] But it is true, we're going to help you a lot, educationally.

But in California, he wants open borders. He wants to take care of all welfare, all medical everything. He wants to pay for college education and education. He wants to pay for medical. I mean, California is going to have more people than the United States of America. No, seriously. People are going to come from all over the world. They get free education, free health care. I mean, does anybody really believe--and by the way, they owe about 14 zillion dollars. And they just put a gas tax on that the Republican candidate wants to take off.
Let me tell you what this president's also done. He said he wants every child, every adult to live the dream of this country. I grew up in a very poor family. I lived in public housing. He wants every child like that to have . . . have a great education and their parents to have the best paying jobs. And he's doing it every day. [applause]
But it's the Democratic. It's called the Democrat Party . . . is openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to break our laws, violate our borders. You see what's happening right now, because they won't give us any votes on border security and overwhelm our country. And they want to sign them up for free health care, free welfare, free education, and the right to vote. [booing]
THE PRESIDENT: I've been an open book for so long, Jon. You know that better than anybody. I'm an open book. And frankly, so many people have looked at me for so many years it's probably one of the reasons I won. I think they're going to want to get along too. If they—look on the assumption they win the House, maybe they win both, and maybe they lose both -– who knows, it's going to be close. Although I'm starting to see the Senate is not looking that close. It's going to be very interesting. I think they're going to want to do things. I think they're going to get legislation passed. We need things on the border, we need things on immigration--they know that too. If you look at education, you look at health care, they're going to want to get things done. So I have a feeling it would be different than a lot of people would believe. But maybe not.
The Government of Mexico has generously offered asylum, jobs, education, and medical care for people within the caravan, but many members of the caravan have refused these offers, which demonstrate that these migrants are not legitimate asylum seekers. They're not looking for protection. Because if they were, they'd be able to get it from Mexico. Mexico has agreed to take them in and encouraged them to stay. But they don't want to stay; they want to come into the United States. So this is no longer safety, and asylum is about safety.

Once they arrive, the Democrat Party's vision is to offer them free health care, free welfare, free education, and even the right to vote. You and the hard-working taxpayers of our country will be asked to pick up the entire tab. And that's what's happening—medical and, in many cases, they've got some big medical problems before they get here.

So my son Zaire Kelly went to—college-bound—right after school, to announce that he was declaring for his college to run track and to further his education and become mayor of District of Columbia or something like that.

However, at our school, just a solution, we actually have checkpoints. When a student walks in the door, we actually have metal detectors. And I oftentimes see that in urban education. And we actually have an x-ray machine that students put their bags through. And extremely—right after this incident happened, a parent who didn't so much agree with it at first, sent me an e-mail saying: "Thank you. Because now I see exactly what's happening."

I said, "Wait a minute. When you pass the tax reform act of whatever year, nobody knows it's tax cuts." "Well, I think they do." Great, let's give everybody an education. We're going to give 350 million people an education. You got to call it the Tax Cut Act. The Tax Cut Act. [applause]
Remember when I'd make a speech and I'd talk about African American—and I'd say, "Highest crime rate, bad education"—I go up like 10 points.
And they're always voting—African Americans vote for Democrats for the most part. You know, vast majority. They've been doing it for over a hundred years. And I said, "Highest crime, bad education, bad this, bad that." And what did I say? "What the hell do you have to lose?" And, now, we have numbers coming out that are so fantastic... [applause]
So it's more important than any specific deal—anything—that we bring jobs into America, and that we provide a transition with mental health and the Amer-I-Can education curriculum that Jim has worked on. Larry Hoover also has a curriculum that he's worked on. We have Montessori curriculums that we worked on. WeWorks has a beautiful curriculum. The Waldorf establishment has a curriculum. We have meditation. There's a lot of things affecting our mental health that makes us do crazy things that puts us back into that trap door called the 13th Amendment.

And I think it would be cool to have Yeezy ideation centers, which would be a mix of education that empowers people and gives them modern information like—sometimes, people say: "This kid has ADD. This kid has ADD." He don't have ADD. School is boring. It was boring. It's not as exciting as this. We have to make it more exciting. We have to mix curriculums.

Torrance, CA, resident Malak Hijaz. I pray five times day. Oh, my name is Malak Hijaz. I pray five times a day and I have to pray at lunch. And I would bring the hijab to cover my hair, and kids would make fun of me, harass me, and attack me. And I would tell the principal, and the principal actually blamed everything on me. At the end, me and my mom complained so many times, and I didn't have a good education at the end. So yes, everything was blamed on me.

But so many things that we've done. And, you know, no matter what you do, they try and find fault. And not only fault, vicious. They're vicious people. And you say, why wouldn't they want to have good education, a good military, a strong economy, safety, security? Why would they want to live like they live in Portland where they just allow these agitators and anarchists to run the streets, why would they want that?
That's the only thing I haven't figured out, why would they. And why would these big companies like Comcast, I call it Concast, it's Comcast but I call it Concast 'cause it's a con job, that's NBC mostly. But if you look at CNN, which is so pathetic, why would they do that? Why would they want to have a country that's in turmoil? 'Cause they create it, the fake news is the worst thing we have going. You know, the lamestream, I call it the lamestream media, but you'd think that they'd want to see great education, great country, great security, strong military —
She wants to let everybody pour into our country. She wants to then give them health care. Next will be, let's also give them free education. Let's also--let's also hurt the State of Missouri and every other state.
You see what's going on in California. He wants to have open borders and everybody worldwide can pour into California, just pour in. And he's going to give you health care and education. You know what? That will be--I think California will end up being larger than the United States. The whole world is going to come. It's really bad stuff.
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
I said it about two people. I said that to Admiral/Dr. Ronnie Jackson, and I said it to Brett Kavanaugh. I said, "Brett, congratulations. I'm choosing you, and you're going to go so fast. This is going to be so easy. You're perfect—the best education, the best marks, best grades. You're a great intellect. You're a great scholar. You have an incredible family. You have nothing in your past. Brett, congrat—" He said, "This is the greatest day of my life. Thank you, sir." I said, "This will go so quickly in the Senate." And they tried to destroy him. [booing] 
I know the people of Montana do not mind that at all. As we speak, Democrats are openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to violate our laws, disrespect our rules and overrun our borders. They don't mind. They don't mind. They want them to come in. Look at what's going on in California with your gubernatorial candidate. "Come on in. We're going to pay for your school, your education. . . "
The Democrat Party—not the Democratic Party, but the Democrat Party wants to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education. . . [booing] . . .  and what do they really want? The right to vote, because they figure that's the way they stay in office forever. Remember that. That's a big move.
Ron DeSantis, I've known him a long time. I mean, I don't want to talk about his education. But he's Harvard. He's Yale. Good student, which is only telling you he's smart. But I know a lot of smart guys that don't have what it takes. He does. He's a smart guy. He's a great guy and he'll keep your jobs going way up. He'll keep your taxes going way down. Ron stands 100 percent with the men and women of law enforcement, like we all do.  [applause]
They want to sign up the illegal immigrants for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and guess what they really want? They want them voting because they believe they'll be voting for Democrats every single time. The Democrats only believe in defending the borders of other countries. They don't believe in defending our country. Open borders, "come on in." means crime. That's what it means.  [booing] 
Does Ohio like that? I don't think so. We know the people of Ohio too well. As we speak, Democrats are open encouraging millions of illegal aliens to violate our law and break into our country, and they want to sign them up for free welfare, free healthcare, free education, and, of course, the right to vote, the right to vote! [booing]
Democrats will also destroy your healthcare by inviting millions upon millions of aliens to violate our borders. Once they arrive, they want to sign them up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. [booing]
And thanks to the extraordinary service of our military in Afghanistan—19 years we're in Afghanistan [booing]—we may now be able to seek a political resolution that, frankly, they've wanted to talk about for a long time. We've hit 'em very hard, but it's been 19 years. Think of that, 19 years. We spend more on military in Afghanistan, $50 billion a year, than most countries spend on their entire country, healthcare, education, everything. We spend more than they do.
Remember this about yourself. You know I always hear the elite, the elite. Well, I always said they said it. I said it here my last night. I always say they say the elite. They're the elite, I am not. Well, I've a better education than them, I'm smarter than them. I went to the best schools. They didn't. Much more beautiful house, much more beautiful apartment, much more beautiful everything. And I'm President and they're not, right? [cheers and applause]
Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
OCASIO-CORTEZ: Well, I think that we have a very real risk of losing the presidency to Donald Trump if we do not have a presidential candidate that is fighting for true transformational change in the lives of working people in the United States. I think that if we elect a president on half-measures that the American people don't quite understand the agenda of a president, you know, a president that says we're fighting for higher wages but we don't want a $15 minimum wage, fighting for education but we don't to make colleges tuition-free, fighting for women's rights, et cetera, but we don't want to go all the way with that, then I think we have a very real risk of losing the presidency.
STEFANIE BROWN JAMES, DEMOCRATIC STRATEGIST: Yes, absolutely. Well, and I think part of her popularity is that she's able to really talk about issues that everyday Americans face. Health care, education, equal pay. And so, you know, she --
And I have some graphs here for you to look at as well. I will tell you that, since you declared the public health emergency and since you have introduced the three-pronged approach to focus on prevention education, treatment and recovery, and law enforcement and interdiction, all three of those areas have produced very positive results.

Mr. President, in your opioid announcement in Manchester, in March of 2018, where the First Lady and you talked about your vision and what to do in the opioid crisis, you called for a one-third reduction, over the next 3 years, in first-time prescriptions. I'm happy to report that you achieved that number in the first year alone. And that is owing in large part to enhanced awareness and education by both the prescribers and the consumers.

We will continue rescuing our inner cities from disastrous reign of Democrats who presided over the decimation of their education systems, the outsourcing of their jobs, and the devastation of their neighborhoods.
You know, you say you want low taxes, good education, strong military, strong borders. You want to have safe homes. You want a house, you want low interest rates, you’ve got low … Hey, you got low interest rates. The lowest ever. Got low rates, it’s a good time to refinance your house, by the way. Great time. You got everything, and then you see these people they’re against . . .  They have no idea what they’re doing. They have no idea what they’re against.
Incredible, the strides that we've made. We will defeat the Democrat effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, and education by liberating Americans from their endless push for a job-killing, soul-crushing Washington regulations. As an example, we're trying to get the car companies, gonna give them a little bit of extra energy, and they'll be able to build a car that consumers can buy, which will be better than the car they make today.
Also a man, you don't wanna fight him, and you don't wanna play him in hockey because he was tough. He just won, not that recently but pretty recently, and I was out here campaigning for him and working hard, and it turned out to be an easy race because everyone loves him and respects him. Congressman Pete Stauber. And a man who gets in the trenches, and he just doesn't care. He wants to win for the people. He loves you. He loves this state. He loves this country. Jim Hagedorn. Thank you. [cheers and applause] And a great friend of mine with his incredible family. He's a friend. He's smart. I guess you'd say he's brilliant. His education is incredible, his military career has been incredible. Then he ran for office, and now he's a United States Senator from the great state of Arkansas, Senator Tom Cotton. [cheers and applause] Great guy. And Minnesota Senate Majority Leader, Paul Gazelka. Paul. Thank you, Paul. Minnesota GOP Chairwoman, Jennifer Carnahan. She's been incredible. [cheers and applause] I said, "Jennifer, are we gonna win in 13 months?" She said, "Honestly sir, I've never seen anything like this. It's gonna be easy. Don't ever say ... Just assume we're like two points behind, okay?" Two points behind.
In a recent Democratic debate, every single Democrat Presidential candidate raised their hand, in favor of giving free government healthcare, to illegal aliens. [booing] And then, you wonder why they come to America? Why wouldn't they come? Free healthcare, free education, free everything. And I jokingly said one time–and everybody then gets a Rolls-Royce. And the fake news said, "President Trump, lied. He said that the illegal immigrants all get a Rolls-Royce." They don't have a lot of sense of humor. That's the problem with this press, what a bunch of dopes. Free Rolls-Royce. "The President told a lie. They don't get a Rolls-Royce." I'm only kidding about the Rolls-Royce. I just don't want to have a story. You know, I have a bad story. I did it again. I promised the Rolls. I–I was just kidding.
But if Democrats seize power, they would throw the floodgates wide open, wide open. We would have people coming into our country, look at what's going on in California, and the people of California don't want it, they say, "Come into California. We'll give you free healthcare, free education." Why wouldn't ... I may even move to California if they keep going. No, but all it does is it brings everybody in. What's wrong with these people? We're rebuilding our military stronger than ever before and we are not going to deplete it again on stupid, senseless, endless wars. [cheers and applause] We've invested more than two and a half trillion dollars restoring our armed forces and all of it was built in the USA—[cheers and applause]—and that includes approving the construction of almost 200 F-35 fighters, stealth, stealth. And many of them are built right here, right here. You know that, right? In Fort Worth. [cheers and applause] As we restore our security, we're also restoring our prosperity. America is winning again and America is respected again. [cheers and applause] And by the way, I have to say this, so outside they have close to 30,000 people. And I wonder if I could ask the Fire Marshal, fill up this little area, let them in, it would be so nice. You know they have a certain max, we broke the record tonight. [cheers and applause] Good place.
But Stacey Abrams wants to give illegal aliens the right to vote. Do you believe this? [booing] I mean, some of these people, they wanna give them education. They wanna give them this. They wanna give them free healthcare. They wanna give these people, that come into our country illegally ...
But Matt Bevin has made record investments in education spending for Kentucky students. Education is so important to him. Matt Bevin will defend your Kentucky values. he loves his state, from an all-out assault being waged on you from the extreme left. Not good. I can't even imagine, how can you vote for somebody from the extreme left? This guy, Beshear, is a major lefty. You know that, right? Why are we even ... Let's just have a good time. Are you sure we need an election tomorrow, Matt? I don't know. How does Kentucky vote for a person ... I'm telling you, he will always vote for Pelosi and Schumer and Shifty Schiff.
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Our polls have gone, over the last month, they've gone through the roof. You look at it, take a look at it, it came out today. The FireHouse poll, the FireHouse poll it's an important poll. It was always good. I never looked at it. Today, I like it a lot. We're up through--nobody can even believe it. So what Pelosi did, and as I said, they do the impeachment, then right away, let's do USMCA, right on top of it. You'd think she'd wait like a day. She wanted to smother the impeachment crap, and that's probably what she did, at least to an extent. But any Democrat that votes for this sham will be voting to sacrifice their house majority, their dignity, and their career. Okay? [applause] And some of these partisan lunatics have already said that if they fail this time, think of this. How about low IQ Maxine Waters? How about Green? How about Green? We've Green. How about Green, where he said, "We have to impeach him because if we don't impeach him, we're not going to win the election." This is what were--this is what we're dealing with. You know, we're dealing with some very bad people. We're dealing with people that don't respect you. And by the way, you know they talk about the elite? You're the elite. They're not the elite. You're the elite. [applause] You're the elite. You got better education. You got better—you got better everything. You're the elite. It always bothers me, they said, "The elite." This is the elite. Look at these people. How beautiful. This is the elite. [applause] You know who are the elite? You look at those jobs reports. We're the best in history unemployment for African Americans, best in history unemployment Hispanic Americans, best in history unemployment Asian Americans. You're the elite. You're the elite.
We are protecting Medicare for our nation's seniors. Democrats want, and you know this, Democrats wanna raid Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. [booing] And you know, we all have a heart. We all have a heart, but when you tell people to come into our country, like this clown governor of California, come into our country, come. They're all gonna come. If they think they're going to get free education, free healthcare, they're all gonna come. If you don't say it, they're not gonna come. Because who would even think this?
And we will never let the Democrats give away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, especially when we say, "Come in. Come in, we'll give you healthcare." You know, it's one thing they come in and it's a rough situation because we all have hearts but when people are saying, like in California this wacky governor, he says, "Come in, we're gonna give you healthcare. We're gonna give you free education. We're gonna give you everything. We're gonna give you a beautiful Rolls-Royce." See to show you how fake they are one of the newscasters said, "Donald Trump said that the governor of California promised a Rolls-Royce to illegal immigrants. He didn't promise them. This was a lie and a misrepresentation by President Trump." They can't take a little humor. They can't take it. These people are sick. They're sick. [booing] No. They're sick people.
Anyway, Republicans are fighting for citizens from every background and from every race, religion, color, and creed. It's true. And our numbers with African-American workers, people, are through the roof. Are through the roof because-- [cheers and applause] Remember I used to say, "What do you have to lose?" I'd read the down the worst on crime, the worst on education. They got this, they got that, they got 10 different things, all horrible. And one day I'm in front of this tremendous group of people and I'm reading this list, African-American, they have the highest crime rate, they have the highest this, they have the worst education, they have the worst schools, they have the worst-- I said, "Stay with me," because they were with the Democrats for a hundred years, more. I said, "Stay with me. What the hell do you have to lose?"
Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They want to let anyone into our country from all around the world. Just come on in, folks, we're going to give you free healthcare. We're going to give you free education. [booing] We're going to give you more than our vets are getting. We're going to give you--every family will get a free Rolls Royce. You know I said that, Matt. I said that to them and some of the fake news picked it up and they said, "President Trump said every family coming into our country illegally gets a brand-new free Rolls Royce. He lied. He lied. He lied." They gave me a Pinocchio. They don't get it, Matt, do they, Matt? Actually, they get it better than we understand. They get it very well. They get it. They know what's happening. And the wall is being built. I will tell you the wall is being built. [applause] And you know they went after us on everybody knows the wall is going up. So, what's happening--you know, you do know who's paying for the wall, don't you? Right. Redemption from illegal aliens that are coming. The redemption money is paying for the wall. They're so sad to hear that because it's okay, finally, they go. You have to understand an entire party is fighting. They'll give me anything I want. Our military would rebuilt it. 2.2, it's really $2.5 trillion over a period of three years. They give me anything but not 10 cents for the wall. They said, "We like drones." Well, drones don't keep people out. Drones are wonderful. They fly around, take pictures. We're going to give you a drone. No good. So, we now have built over 100 miles of wall. [applause]
Throughout this great national struggle, the American people have embodied the unrivaled patriotism and will power that has led America to conquer every challenge—every single one—in our Nation's history. More than 90 percent of Americans say they're staying home as much as possible, putting their lives, their careers, their educations, and their dreams on hold out of devotion to their fellow citizens and to their country. Social distancing: That's the way you win.

Republicans believe access to education is a civil right. It's a civil right. [cheers and applause] Twenty of 20 of the most dangerous cities in America are controlled by Democrats. Think of that, 20 of 20. And so is nearly every major city with a child poverty rate that's over 30%. They're controlled by Democrats. We can name every one of them. The murder rate in Baltimore and Detroit is higher than El Salvador, Guatemala, or even Afghanistan. How they doing, the Democrats running those cities? Your whole country will be like that. In 2018 alone, our police arrested nearly 12,000 people for murder and manslaughter, 25,000 people for rape, and nearly 1.5 million for assault, violent assault. The Democrats' push against our police will drive up crime and drive up costs at levels you'd never believe. Thousands of innocent lives will be lost. As president, I will always support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. [cheers and applause]
We appreciate your being here. We're with our great Hispanic leaders from all over the country. And we've done really well with Hispanics. We like them, they like me, and we've helped them a lot with the jobs. Whether it's jobs, education, or so many other things, it's been really good.

Lt. Gov. Núñez. And choice and education—as a mother, my youngest attends True North Classical Academy, an excellent charter school in Miami. I can tell you that those policies make a difference.

We need to empower their families, empower those parents with educational choice so that they can go to the schools that will serve them well, many of them Catholic and evangelical schools. I think this is a winning issue for the country, a winning issue for you politically, as well, with the Hispanic community.

Former Lt. Gov. Sanchez. No running water. But through hard work, staying in school, getting a good education, and taking advantage of the American Dream, I'm here, sitting across the table from the President of the United States. What an honor. That's the American Dream. Thank you, sir.

Now, we've said the number one issue is, we have to finish the technical fix on enhanced unemployment. We're going to make sure that we don't pay people more money to stay home than go to work. We want to make sure that people who can go to work safely can do so. We'll have tax credits that incentivize businesses to bring people back to work. We'll have tax credits for PP and E, for safe work environment. And we're going to have big incentives, money to the States for education, for schools that can open safely and do education.

Joe Biden has pledged to abolish immigration enforcement, suspend all removals, provide free government healthcare, and, you know, they want to give it to illegal aliens. You don't get it. You don't get it. Restore, catch and release. Shield violent criminal aliens. This is what they want to do. And give every illegal alien on the planet earth a free ticket to invent an asylum claim and gain automatic admission into our country. We will have people coming into our country that never even thought of it before. You get free education, you get free healthcare, why wouldn't they come? Let's go to America. The Biden plan would unleash a flood of illegal immigration like the world has never seen. It's crazy. Biden's plan is the most radical, extreme, reckless, dangerous, and deadly immigration plan ever put forward by a major party candidate. It must be defeated, and it will be defeated on November 3rd. It will be defeated. [cheers and applause]
Joe Biden recently raised his hand on the debate stage and promised, here give away -- he was going to give it away, your healthcare dollars to illegal immigrants, which is going to bring healthmassive number of immigrants into our country. Massive numbers will pour into our country in order to get all of the goodies that they want to get, education, healthcare, everything.
We will win the race to 5G and build the world's best cyber and missile defense, already under construction. We will fully restore patriotic education to our schools and always protect -- we will always, always protect free speech on college campuses. [applause]
America will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] When I took over, NASA was dead. Now it's the most vibrant space center in the world, by far. We will restore patriotic education to our schools, and we'll teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause] For years, you had a president who apologized for America. Now you have a president who is standing up for America and standing up for the great people of Pennsylvania. [cheers and applause]
We'll protect Medicare and Social Security, and we will protect your Social Security. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions, always. Always. [cheers and applause] America will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] Very exciting. You know, we reopened NASA. That place was gone. They had grass growing out of the runways, you had to see it. Now it's the number one space center in the world by far. By far. You see what's going on. You see what's going on. We will restore patriotic education to our schools. Oh, you know what I'm talking about. Look at you. [cheers and applause] This is a very sophisticated group, Thom. You know what I'm talking about, patriotic education. [cheers and applause] Well, the first thing they do is they wanna take your history away.
You know, with the wonderful invention of TiVo, one of the greats, you can play it back. I said, "Who was that?" He said, "I don't know, sir." I said, "Play it back." I said, "That man is going to be a star." It was John James. [cheers and applause] And that was in the Republican primary. And after learning about him with his incredible career and helicopter, and he's a great, and actually a great flyer, I heard the other day, a great one, a really good one as opposed to those that aren't so good, but his incredible background and education at West Point and all of the things he did. I said, "This guy," and I endorsed him, and he went like a rocket ship. Frankly, if he had a little more support, he would've won the last time. This time, I hear you're even, and maybe even ahead, and we're gonna win with John James. [cheers and applause] He's a great guy, but I'm gonna introduce him in a second.
Just, all you have to do is take a look at all the ads they're running against me. Favored nations, where we pay whatever the lowest is in the world, we pay that number. We will protect Medicare and Social Security, and we will always protect our patients. We will always our people. We will protect your pre-existing conditions, as I said. America will land the first woman on the moon, and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] We will restore patriotic education, you know what I mean by that—[cheers and applause]—and we will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause]
Please understand when you see those commercials, it means your drug prices are coming down. We will strongly protect Medicaid and Social Security, which they will give up. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] And America will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] And we will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause]
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] We will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust," and we're gonna keep it that way. [cheers and applause] For years, you had a president who apologized for America. Now you have a President who is standing up for America and standing up for your state, Nevada. [cheers and applause] So get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors, get your coworkers, and on November 3rd or sooner, get out and vote. [cheers and applause]
We built the greatest economy in history and now we're doing it again, so it's called "Make America great again." And I say, "Make America great again and again." Again and again. [cheers and applause] And we added, as you've probably heard, we added 3.3 million jobs for Hispanic Americans in the last four months. That's a record. So we're coming back very, very strong. I call it the super V. In July, I launched the White House Hispanic Prosperity Initiative to improve access to education and economic development and opportunity for all Hispanic Americans. It's been a very big success. We have great people on the board. And we have, that Biden would, as you know, terminate this recovery because if a doctor said, "Let's shut it down," we have all these records.
Kirby. —and I'm the first Vice-Chair of the Arizona Republican party. [cheers and applause] Most recently, I completed eight years of service on my local school board and in the spirit of lifelong learning, three months ago, I earned my Master's in education policy.
Kirby. I have a, I have a lot of responsibilities and priorities, but my passion lies with education policy, and that's what I'd like to talk with you about today. I first want to lead by thanking both you and Ivanka, who— She did a— By the way, she did a fabulous job introducing you at the convention—
Kirby. We must stop the indoctrination and instead teach our children to love our country and all she has to offer. And Mr. President, that includes standing for the American flag. [cheers and applause] We must have an education system that prioritizes the children over the adults and funds the student instead of the institution. [cheers and applause] You talked about school choice earlier, there are a lot of candidates out there who say, "School choice for me, but not for thee."
We have to reject those candidates because school choice cannot be reserved for just the few people. We need to empower all parents with the right to choose the educational systems for their children. And more importantly, we need to empower them with the means to execute against that choice. And when we have done that, we will have truly freed all students from their ZIP codes. [cheers and applause]
STEPHANOPOULOS: Mr. President, we have -- we have -- we have to move on. But even before the pandemic the average black family was earning half of what the average white family was earning. Even if you hold the education...

We will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] And NASA is now the hottest space center anywhere in the world. And when I took over three and a half years ago, there was grass growing in the runways, you know that, it was closed down, it was a mess. We are now the hottest in the world. You see what's going up. And we've got a lot of rich guys sending them up too. I liked that better. I said, "Let them do it." Rich guys like rockets, I don't know, they like rockets, boom. I see dollars going right up—[laughter]—but they need a good place to launch. We have the best places. We have the best places, so it's been incredible what we've done with NASA. We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. We're already doing it. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause]
America will land the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. [cheers and applause] And we brought NASA back. NASA, when I got in three and a half years ago, grass was growing through the cracks of the runway. It was over, it was closed. It was nothing. Now it's the number one space center in the entire world by a factor of five. [cheers and applause] We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will. We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." You know, you know that the Democrat National Convention and the Pledge of Allegiance at a caucus, two of them, not one. I heard the first one, I said, "Oh, they must've made a mistake." They left "under God" out of the Pledge of Allegiance. [booing]
Until about 24 hours ago, that's all they talked about is TikTok, TikTok. [laughter] We have a deal worked out, I think with Walmart is gonna buy in along with Oracle. Larry Ellison, it's gonna be an incredible combination. And I said, you know, "Do me a favor. Could you put up five billion dollars into a fund for education so we can educate people as to real history of our country, the real history, not the fake history." [cheers and applause] Because we're getting very close to that deal. And all of the technology will be maintained here. They're going to move probably to the great state of Texas. Sorry, we got you a lot of business when it came—But they're gonna move into the United States, which is what's important. They're moving to the United States, unbelievable company. They're going to have 25,000 jobs. If it all goes, I gave them the preliminary approval.
But they're putting up five billion dollars. And my only problem is they did it so fast, I should have asked for more. What happened is when I suggested they should put up a lot of money everybody said, senators, congressmen, women, everybody. They said, "You can't do that. That's never been done." That's the problem, nothing's ever been done. [laughter] And we had other companies, a lot of people wanted it. And I said, "You gotta put up five billion dollars either to the Treasury of the United States maybe or into some education fund or do something." And they were sort of agreeing with me. They thought it was okay. And then I went to the legal eagles legals here and I said, "They're gonna put up five million dollars, give it to the United States." "Sir, you can't do that. There's no provision." I said, "How the hell can there be no provision? We're making the deal possible. Why can't they give us five billion dollars?" That's B, with a—That's a lot of money. [laughter]
You know, right now, they're staying wherever they are. When you say, "We're gonna give you free education, we're gonna give you free healthcare. We're gonna take care of you. Everything's gonna be perfect. We're gonna give you, every single family," now watch, they'll print this. "We've checked it out, and he lied about this."
The President. Yeah, that was supposed to be a joke, right? It was a joke. It was a joke, everybody was laughing, but they refused to go that extra quarter of a second. He wants to indoctrinate your children with poisonous anti-American lies in education. [booing] To combat the toxic left-wing propaganda in our schools, I am launching a new pro-American lesson plan for students called 1776 Commission. It's already done. [cheers and applause]
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriot education to our schools, patriotic education. We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, and we will never change it, by the way. We will never change it. You know, they took the word "God" out of the Pledge of Allegiance twice. [booing] I said, "Did they make a mistake? Did they make a mistake?" They didn't, for them. They made a mistake for us. We're not gonna put up with it. But we will keep, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause]
Sleepy Joe Biden wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike, ban American energy, destroy the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. How about that one? And you know the bad part about that? You know, we all, we all have heart. We wanna take care of people. Problem with that is, everybody's gonna come to the United States. People that weren't even thinking about it, they're gonna say, "Oh man, these idiots are giving free healthcare, free college education. They're giving free everything. They're giving a Rolls Royce to every family that enters through the southern border."
We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words of our national motto, "In God we trust." [cheers and applause] For years, you had a president who apologized for America. Now you have a president who is standing up for America and standing up for the great state of Ohio. [cheers and applause] So get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors, get your co-workers, get everybody, and get out and vote. Gotta get out and vote. [cheers and applause] And in your state, in Ohio, early voting has already begun, and don't wait. And when you see them cheating on the other side, I don't say "if," when, when you see them cheating with those ballots, all of those unsolicited ballots, those millions of ballots, you see them, anytime you do, report them to the authorities. The authorities awaiting and watching.
So all you people in the suburbs that say, "I don't know, I'm making up my mind." And Cory Booker was the one that was going to lead it out. He was gonna be the one. He wants it to be—Wants those projects to be nice and big. I just hope you, I just hope you're gonna remember that, sooner than November 3rd, because you can do it sooner, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. So, the problem with free health care—We all have a heart, we all want to take care of people. The problem is when you promise free education, free healthcare, all this stuff, and free healthcare. Remember Sleepy Joe during the debate? "Who wants to give free healthcare to illegal immigrants?" And everybody immediately raises their hand, you know, radical left, raises. And Joe—Do you remember? That's a classic. He's [guttural sounds]. [laughter] Remember? Sleepy Joe. And he'll do it because he has no choice because they have total power. He's like a puppet for them and indoctrinate your children with poisonous anti-American lies. [booing] To combat the toxic left-wing propaganda in our schools, I announced last week that we are launching a new pro-American lesson plan for students called 1776 Commission. [cheers and applause]
We will strongly protect Medicare and Social Security and we will always protect patients. We will protect every single patient. America will land, by the way, the first woman on the moon and the United States will be the first nation to land an astronaut on Mars. You know, NASA was an absolute disaster, grass was growing through the fair—The fairways too. They had fairways, that's about all they used, were the fairways. And now we have something—Right through the runways, the landing strips, it was all grass-infested, it was all weed-infested, and now it's the number one space center in the world, by far. It was a closed up mess. [cheers and applause] And we have rich guys sending up rockets, Elon and others. They send up rockets and we say, "Let them keep going. Let them keep spending money on these rockets. They love rockets." We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And we will live by the timeless words in our national motto, In God we trust." [cheers and applause]
The President. I had such a nice life before doing this. [laughter] But no administration has ever done in the first three and a half years, not even close, what we've done, and that's very gratifying, I wanna tell you that. [cheears and applause] And thank you very much. We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. We're already doing it. [cheears and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheears and applause]
After years of rebuilding other countries, we're finally rebuilding our country. [cheers and applause] The path to the American dream has always been education. Republicans believe that school choice is the civil rights issue of our time. [cheers and applause] And Joe Biden isn't allowed to go there because of the radical left. He's controlled by the radical left, totally. He's exhausted. [laughter] But Biden's promised a ban on charter schools and to oppose school choice. Joe Biden is willing to spend billions and billions upon resettling refugees from all around the world, but he won't spend one penny providing school choice to Black children in America—[shouting]—which is interesting. During their first year in office, President Obama and VP Biden cut funding for historically Black colleges and universities. [booing] I've increased HBCU funding and I made it permanent. [cheers and applause] You know, just a quick story. So, so what was happening is that, the first year I saw these probably 42 people came up and they were the heads of individual colleges, historically Black colleges, universities. And they were the heads and I see them and I said, "Oh, hello, how you doing?" They were nice people. And we took a picture in the White House. We do that.
BIDEN: Yes, there is. There's systemic injustice in this country, in education and work and in law enforcement and the way in which it's enforced. But look, the vast majority of police officers are good, decent, honorable men and women. They risk their lives every day to take care of us. But there are some bad apples. And when they occur, when they find them, they have to be sorted out. They have to be held accountable. They have to be held accountable. And what I'm going to do as President of the United States is call a, a, together an entire group of people at the White House, everything from the civil rights groups, to the police officers, to the police chiefs, and we're going to work this out.
BIDEN: I do. I do. You know, my daughter is a social worker. And she's written a lot about this. She's got a graduate degree from the University of Pennsylvania in social work. So, one of the reasons why I ended up working on the East side of Wilmington, Delaware, which is 90 percent African American, was to learn more about what was going on. When I didn't -- I never had to tell my daughter if she's pulled over, make sure she puts, for traffic stop, puts both hands on top of the wheel. And don't reach for the glove box because someone may shoot you. But a Black parent, no matter how wealthy or how poor they are, has to teach their child, when you're walking down the street, don't have a hoodie on when you go across the street, making sure that you, in fact, if you get pulled over, just Yes or No sir, just hands on top of the wheel. Because you are in fact, the victim, whether you're a person making 300,000 -- $300,000-a-year person, or someone who's on food stamps. The fact of the matter is there is institutional racism in America. And we have always said we've never lived up to it. Do we hold these truths to be sovereign, are all men and women are created equal? Guess what -- we have never ever lived up to it. We have constantly been moving the needle further and further between inclusion and exclusion. This is the first president come along and says that's the end of that. We're not going to do that anymore. We have to provide for economic opportunity, better education, better health care, better access to schooling, better access to opportunity to borrow money to start businesses. All the things we can do. And I've laid out a clear plan as to how to do those things. Just to give people a shot. It's about accumulating the ability to have wealth, as well as it is to be free from violence.
We will always support the heroes of law enforcement. We will maintain America's unrivaled military might, and we will preserve peace through strength. [applause] We will protect social security and Medicare, and we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. But, we will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and children and restore a patriotic education to our schools. We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history and always respect our great American flag. [applause] And we will live by the words of our national motto, In God We Trust. [applause]
David and Kelly will protect Social Security and Medicare, and they will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. We will stop the radical indoctrination of our students and restore patriotic education to our schools. [cheers and applause] We will teach our children to love our country, honor our history, and always respect our great American flag. [cheers and applause] And, we will live by the words of our national motto, In God We Trust, and it'll stay that way. [cheers and applause] From Atlanta to Augusta, to Savannah, to Columbus, from Athens—And, I wanna say hello to Herschel Walker, Athens. [cheers and applause] Herschel. 10.2 yards a carry for a while, he made a lot of quarterbacks look very good. We love Herschel. To right here in Dalton, Georgia, we inherit the legacy of generations of American Patriots who gave their blood, sweat and tears to defend our country and to defend our freedom. We stand on the shoulders of American heroes who crossed the oceans, settled a continent, tamed the wilderness, laid down the railroads, raised up the great skyscrapers, and won two World Wars, defeated fascism and communism, and made America into the single greatest nation in the history of the world, and the best is yet to come. [cheers and applause] And proud citizens like you helped build this country. And together we are taking back our country, our fight to drain the Washington swamp and reclaim America's destiny and dignity has only just begun. We will not bend, we will not break, we will not yield. We will never give in, we will never give up, we will never back down. We will never, ever surrender. [cheers and applause] Because we are Americans, and we are from Georgia—[cheers and applause]—and our hearts bleed red, white and blue. [cheers and applause] We are one movement, one people, one family, and one glorious nation under God. And together with the incredible people of Georgia, we have made America powerful again, our military. We have made America wealthy again, our stock market. We have made America strong again, look at that arm, look at that. We have made America proud again, we're proud of our country. We have made America safe again. And we will make America great again. Go get 'em, David, go get 'em, Kelly, go get 'emm tomorrow. [cheers and applause]
This Administration has failed America's inner cities. Remember: it has failed America's inner cities. It's failed them on education. It's failed them on jobs. It's failed them on crime. It's failed them at every level.
But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our Nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.
We have a full agenda, unlike a lot of other meetings that happen of this general type. We're going to cover some of the immigration things. We're going to cover regulatory relief. We're going to cover tax and trade, women in the workplace, infrastructure, and education. And in each of those areas, we'll get suggestions, ways to make things happen, happen faster to improve the country.

So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
The President. Yes, it's very sad. And you know, the reason is for protection and safety. So the statute is so plain and so clear. I said last week—I was speaking to a great group of sheriffs, the sheriffs group in Washington, and I said, if you have a college education, you can understand it; if you have a high school education, you can understand it; if you were a bad student in high school, you can understand it. And I was told—I'll check, but I found it hard to believe—in an over 30-page decision by the appellate court, three judges—and you could tell by the way they were reacting, because it was broadcast on television, and everything we do gets a lot of people watching. So you could tell by the way that phone call went, wasn't looking good. And when they wrote their decision, as I understand it—maybe I'm wrong—but they didn't write the statute that they were making the decision about, because every word of the statute is a total kill for the other side.

And there's another major promise I have kept to the American people: I've nominated a fantastic Justice to replace the late, great Justice Scalia. His name is Judge Neil Gorsuch. And he comes from my list of 20 very, very highly qualified judges. He's an incredible, and he has an incredible résumé. He's respected by all. His education is as good as it can get. His writings are truly amazing. He will be a true defender of our Constitution.

But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind and the souls of every American child. Education is the civil rights issue of our time. I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African American and Latino children. These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious, or home school that is right for them.

I'm excited to be joined today by students from Gateway Technical College. And remember the college president, Bryan Albrecht. Thank you. Great job. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, Bryan. Your partnership with Snap-on is a great example of why vocational education is the way of the future.

In all things, we are returning power to the people where it belongs. We're going to defend the Second Amendment and your right to keep and bear arms. We are going to bring education local, and we are going to end Common Core. We are going to stop Federal overreach and defend the God-given rights of every American family.

Secretary of Education Elisabeth P. DeVos. Mr. President, it's a privilege to serve, to serve the students of this country, and to work to ensure that every child has an equal opportunity to get a great education and, therefore, a great future.

And remember, I came in—and some people said, don't say that. I'd say, what do you have to lose? I talked about the inner city, and I talked about the crime and the problems and the lack of education. And I talked to my African American friends, and I said, vote for me, what the hell do you have to lose? Remember that? The Hispanic, the African American, the inner cities.

We're going to reduce income tax rates for individuals, increase the child tax credit, and extend it to more middle-income families, a far larger group; repeal the alternative minimum tax; end the estate tax, or the death tax, as it's commonly called; retain tax incentives for mortgages, charitable contributions, work, higher education, retirement savings. We have a lot things that are the important generators in our economy.
But I'm going to do something better than that. We're going to have choice. Now, we have choice in education now. We're starting that, right? And I thought of it the other day. We're going to have choice in jobs so that you don't have one job and hang on, even though you don't like it. You're going to have choice, where you can take five jobs, six jobs, seven jobs, pick the one you like at the most money. That's what's starting to happen, because the jobs are coming in. That's what's starting to happen.

Vice President Pence. We truly do believe that there are opportunities after our discussions this weekend for bipartisan work on a broad range of issues from infrastructure to workforce to vocational education. And I can say, I'm even more confident, after this weekend's discussions, that, with the President's leadership and with the strong leadership in the Congress, we're going to keep delivering for the American people in 2018 and we're going to create a stronger and more prosperous America.

Rep. Hoyer. I want to follow up on that. There are no Democrats that don't want to make sure that the military is funded properly. And over the last 4 years, we had an agreement between Mr. Ryan and Senator Murray—Speaker Ryan and—that we understand that our military is critically important. But we also understand that our domestic issues, whether it's education, whether it's health care, whether it's the environment, whether it's transportation and infrastructure, they're important, as well.

The President. Yes. Go ahead. Sen. Brown. Eleven people a day, in my State of Ohio, die from opioid overdose. This is an important bill. The next step is that we actually provide dollars to communities so we can scale up treatment. But we woefully underfund education, prevention, and treatment programs. The waiting lists are too long. That's the importance of Medicaid. That's the importance, frankly, the Affordable Care Act. That's the importance of funding local communities so that they can do what they need to do to deal with the terrible addiction that so many families face.

Kernen: Do you have a way of addressing the skills gap and education? As a businessperson, you solve problems. Now you're in government ...

One of Staub's employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where he trained to become a welder. Like many hard-working Americans, Corey plans to invest his tax cut raise into his new home and his two daughters' education. Corey, please stand. And he's a great welder. [Laughter] I was told that by the man that owns that company that's doing so well. So congratulations, Corey.

Here are the four pillars of our plan: The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by their parents at a young age. That covers almost three times more people than the previous administration covered. Under our plan, those who meet education and work requirements and show good moral character will be able to become full citizens of the United States over a 12-year period.

I do see that there is a huge pool of retired law enforcement officers where municipalities and counties have actually invested a lot of money into training them, and now they're retired. And often, because they are receiving a public retirement, they cannot go back into that similar kind of retirement plan. If they go into an educational plan, they can actually work for a school, be trained. The school doesn't have to train them. But, also, they can learn and figure out where cameras and different security pieces need to be implemented within the schools, because of their experience and training.
But I think most of the solutions are going to come from the States. We have some States that are doing things with arming personnel inside the school system that they seem to think is working well. I know I'm working with my legislature, as recently as last night, in talking about what is the cost for education. What is the cost—you're a businessman—to do business.
So we are going to be working very hard on the inner cities: having to do with education, having to do with crime. We're going to try and fix as quickly as possible—you know it takes a long time. It's taken a hundred years or more for some of these places to evolve, and they evolved, many of them, very badly.
But we're going to be working very hard on health and health care, very, very hard on education. And also, we're going to working in a stringent way, and a very good way, on crime. You go to some of these inner city places, and it's so sad when you look at the crime. You have people—and I've seen this, and I've sort of witnessed it. In fact, in two cases, I have actually witnessed it. They lock themselves into apartments, petrified to even leave, in the middle of the day. They're living in hell. We can't let that happen. So we're going to be very, very strong.
We're going to work on it very hard. One of the questions I was asked—I thought it was a very good question—was about the inner cities. I mean, that's part of it. But we're going to work on education. We're going to work on lack—you know, we're going to stop—we're going to try and stop the crime. We have great law enforcement officials. We're going to try and stop crime. We're not going to try and stop, we're going to stop crime.
And, very importantly, we are going to work to restore local control to our Nation's education system. Betsy is here someplace, and she is going to be, I think, fantastic. I think she's going to be fantastic. Stand up, Betsy. Betsy feels so strongly, and she has had such support from so many people. You know, you don't see that too much because you see the anti, you never see the positive. But I can tell you, I've had so many calls while she was going through that horrible process. That was a tough, tough, nasty process. And she hung in, she was as strong as you get. But so many people were calling Betsy, saying you will do such a fantastic job once you get it.

It's like sometimes I'd say, it's much tougher to get into Harvard than it is to stay there. Does that make sense? [Laughter] It's tougher to get into the Wharton School of Finance—you can't get in. But if you get in, it's fine, you get through, right? I think you're going to do a fantastic job, and we're very proud of you. And you took a lot of heat, but you're going to do great. So she wants to bring decisionmaking powers back to parents, back to the families, and back to the States, where they can really control education.

Secretary of Education Elisabeth P. DeVos. Mr. President, it's a privilege to serve, to serve the students of this country, and to work to ensure that every child has an equal opportunity to get a great education and, therefore, a great future.

We're going to reduce income tax rates for individuals, increase the child tax credit, and extend it to more middle-income families, a far larger group; repeal the alternative minimum tax; end the estate tax, or the death tax, as it's commonly called; retain tax incentives for mortgages, charitable contributions, work, higher education, retirement savings. We have a lot things that are the important generators in our economy.
Remember I used to read stats, Hispanic, African-American stats. And I'd read—and it said, "high crime rate, lousy education, this, this," I'd read like six. And one day in front of a massive crowd, 25,000 to 30,000 people, I said, "Vote for me. What the hell do you have to lose?" And you know what? They did. They did. [applause] 
But not only does that affect, as everyone knows, the defense and everything that is—goes along with it, but those mining leases contribute billions of dollars to our school trust funds for the K-through-12 education system for the entire State. So without that, we don't have that money for the school trust funds as well.

And when you hear the numbers—I used to go into arenas, and I'd read the horrible statistics on crime and education, and how badly people are being treated in Hispanic communities, in African-American communities. And you remember, I'd go and I'd say, "You've been voting for Democrats for 100 years. You have these horrible"— look at my friends, right there. [applause]
"You've had these horrible, horrible statistics for years on crime and the educational abuse, and all of the things." And I went in, and I'm reading them, point after point, and I'm seeing, and I'm—I looked out at the audience. For 100 years they were with Democrats. The Democrats felt they had automatic votes.
What happens, I said, if the entire world decides to go to California, because they get free health care, free medical care, and free education? California has just increased in size to 500 million people. California has just become one really large person. California--think of it. He says, I want to open the border, I want everyone to come in, at the same time for illegal aliens and illegal immigrants. Lot of different names. He wants to get rid of us.
He wants to cut down on law enforcement. And he wants to pay for their medical, their health care, and their education. But I really asked--look, it's all about common sense, right? I think I won because of common sense. And because . . . like you, like you, you, me, we're smart, we're really smart. But I said to myself, just common sense, everyone is going to come in. I may even move to California to get free health care. [laughter]
The President. Thanks, Steve. Thank you, Steve. Great job. We want to give every citizen the opportunity to achieve their American Dream. That's why we're committed to expanding apprenticeships and on-the-job-training and vocational education, you know, a word that you don't hear that much. I'm bringing it back. Because when I was growing up, I had so many vocational schools, and you don't hear that anymore.

My administration is making a historic investment in workforce development. We established the National Council on the American Worker, and I recently signed a bill to provide more than $1 billion annually for vocational education.

Mr. Nickelaides. For me, my apprenticeship experience has been a pretty good one. When I went to get a job with Local 98, as a member of the Air Force National Guard, I told them that there'd be a good chance that I'd be deploying pretty often. And I told them that during my interview. And I really thank God for the opportunity that they still gave me to get a job and to train me in their union. So I thought that maybe it would be just words that I'd get from Local 98—that, yes, they support the military—but I didn't really know if I could believe it. But I was able to deploy for 3 months—short little deployment—and upon my return, I was able to get pushed right back into the education program with the Local 98. And I'm back working, upon arrival, back in the United States. And tomorrow I'm waking up at 4:20 and going back to work again. [Laughter]

He wants open borders-- think of this, just think of this-- he wants open borders, everybody can come to California. And he wants to give you free health care, free education, driver's licenses. I said the other night jokingly probably a Rolls-Royce. And one of these people said, he said he's going to give them a Rolls-Royce. And he did not say that, the Governor never-- [laughter]
But in California, he wants open borders. He wants to take care of all welfare, all medical everything. He wants to pay for college education and education. He wants to pay for medical. I mean, California is going to have more people than the United States of America. No, seriously. People are going to come from all over the world. They get free education, free health care. I mean, does anybody really believe--and by the way, they owe about 14 zillion dollars. And they just put a gas tax on that the Republican candidate wants to take off.
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
Look, when you hear—I've been hearing 11 million; I've been 12 million; I've been hearing 35 million. For years, we've been hearing the same numbers; you've been hearing the same numbers. I used to hear 11 million all the time. It would always stay right at 11. I said, does it ever increase or go down? "No, it's 11." Nobody knows. It's probably 30, 35 million people. They would flow in mostly from the southern border. They'd come in, and nobody would talk about it, nobody would do anything about it. And a lot of problems were caused, including problems to our educational systems, to our hospital systems, to so many different things that we have. And tremendous damage was done. So it would have been a lot easier for me to sit back and just let it continue. But it was out of control. And our strong economy makes it even more difficult, because people come up, because our country is doing better, by far, than any other country in the world, from an economic standpoint. We're the talk of the world. And we had a little glitch in the stock market last month, but it's still up, I guess, around 30 percent from the time I got elected. And it's going to go up.

Reggie Singh, brother of deceased Newman, CA, Police Officer Ronil Singh. So, Ronil Singh—we are originally from Fiji Islands. He always wanted to be in law enforcement. So, legally, we migrated to America to fulfill his dream to join the law enforcement. After—English is our second language. He worked on that, got his education, applied for a law enforcement agency. And he was asked to get his citizenship. He worked towards that. And he became a cop—K-9—corporal K-9.

THE PRESIDENT: We have to protect Israel. We have to protect other things that we have. But we're- yeah, they'll be coming back in a matter of time. Look, we're protecting the world. We're spending more money than anybody's ever spent in history, by a lot. We spent, over the last five years, close to 50 billion dollars a year in Afghanistan. That's more than most countries spend for everything including education, medical, and everything else, other than a few countries.

Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
