But we also got rid of the individual mandate from Obamacare which basically guts out Obamacare. That will be next. That will be next. That's where you pay a lot of money for the privilege of not getting healthcare. OK. How do you like that one? How that one made it through court, I will made it through twice.
He co-sponsored legislation that provides late term abortion on demand. You know that. He backed a total government takeover of healthcare and he even sponsored legislation to provide free taxpayer funded healthcare to illegal aliens. Which I'm sure you love paying for that. [booing]
Democrats will also destroy your healthcare by inviting millions upon millions of aliens to violate our borders. Once they arrive, they want to sign them up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. [booing]
And thanks to the extraordinary service of our military in Afghanistan—19 years we're in Afghanistan [booing]—we may now be able to seek a political resolution that, frankly, they've wanted to talk about for a long time. We've hit 'em very hard, but it's been 19 years. Think of that, 19 years. We spend more on military in Afghanistan, $50 billion a year, than most countries spend on their entire country, healthcare, education, everything. We spend more than they do.
The Democrats have to now decide whether they will continue defrauding the public with ridiculous bullshit...[cheers and applause] ...partisan investigations. Or wayther [sic] they will apologize to the American people and join us to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, bring down the cost of healthcare and prescription drugs which we are doing incredibly, help us fix our broken trade deals which are coming along really well. We have our team right now in China. They just arrived. China. China. We've gone up, they've gone down but we want them to be healthy. We want them to be happy and healthy. China. And by the way we are building the wall as you -- , we are building that wall. Building – [cheers and applause] We are building that wall!
We eliminated the Obamacare individual mandate penalty. [cheers and applause] The most unpopular part, and we are going to hopefully in the court -- in Texas you heard we won the case, now it has to be appealed and then we will go to the United States Supreme Court. We have a chance of killing Obamacare. We almost did it, but somebody unfortunately surprised us with thumbs down but we will do it a different way. You know what, we will do it a different way. But we got rid of the individual mandate where you were forced to pay a lot of money for the privilege of not having to buy bad healthcare. Okay? Not too good. So, we are going to get rid of Obamacare.
And I said it the other day, the Republican Party will become the party of great healthcare. It's good. It's important. [cheers and applause] And we've created new options to help Americans purchase affordable health plans all across state lines. You now have options you would have never had. The Democrats are pushing socialist government-run healthcare that bans private healthcare for 180 million Americans. [booing] Now think of it. A lot of you have private plans and they're great.
Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
OCASIO-CORTEZ: Well, I'm encouraged by the fact that he is now against the Hyde amendment. I think that that's where -- I think it's a very base level where all candidates need to be. I'm excited to be introducing a repeal of the Hyde amendment via amendment -- we'll see where it goes -- for incarcerated women and the -- the maternal and reproductive healthcare of incarcerated women is -- it should be guaranteed as it is with all women in the United States. And so I think it really depends -- and that's really what the Hyde amendment is about.
The Hyde amendment isn't about abortion per se. The Hyde amendment is -- is truly about equality of health care and health care access for low-income women and women of color and women that get caught in our -- in our mass incarceration system. And so the Hyde amendment is -- is about income inequality and it's about women's healthcare in a system of income inequality. So I think that we need to repeal it. I think that -- that having that -- a strong record, I think all of this is stuff for voters to decide. But I think that we really -- this is not in the niche topic of women's issues anymore, this is an American issue.
More than 120 Democrats in Congress have also signed up to support crazy Bernie Sanders' socialist government takeover of healthcare. [Booing.]
I've done more in 2-1/2 years than any President in the history of this country. And when you look at the things … I'm going to give you a list. Nobody's approved what we've approved; nobody's gotten through. Whether it's the Vets and Choice, and accountability. Both two things you could never get approved. They could never get them approved. You look at the tax cuts, you look at ANWR. You look at the individual mandate. I've had a lot to do with healthcare. You look at right-to-try. Add right-to-try with the individual mandate.
THE PRESIDENT: You had to pay not to pay for insurance — to pay a fortune for the privilege of not paying. One of the most unpopular part. We'll get great healthcare after — if we win back the House. And keep the Senate. Keep the presidency.
THE PRESIDENT: So we're rebuilding the military, which is creating jobs. We're doing some really good things in health care. We're doing some tremendous things in health care. You see what's happening with some of the policies that we're coming out with. We got rid of, as I said, we got rid of the individual mandate, which was by far the most popular thing in Obamacare. We're managing Obamacare much better. But Obamacare is a very — it's very bad. And if we win, I will do healthcare. If we get the House. If we get back the House — you can't do it without the House.
If we get the House, we get the Senate, we get the presidency, we will have a great health care plan, we will have tremendous healthcare. But we're doing a good job on that anyway. Doing a very good job.
We have a healthcare plan that's far better than Obamacare. I'm keeping Obamacare alive because I felt I should have—I should do that. We had a chance to terminate it, and a gentleman voted against it after campaigning for many years to repeal and replace, but he voted against repeal and replace. Someday, somebody will explain that to me—[laughter]—but that's what happened. Because we just about had it done.

THE PRESIDENT:  Nearly half of all the homeless people living in the streets in America happen to live in the state of California. What they are doing to our beautiful California is a disgrace to our country. It’s a shame.  The world is looking at it. Look at Los Angeles, with the tents and the horrible, horrible, disgusting conditions. Look at San Francisco. Look at some of your other cities, and then you have a Governor  . . .  You have a Governor that invites the whole world to come into California. “We’ll pay for your healthcare.  We’ll pay for. . . ”
And then you wonder why so many people are coming up. They’re coming up because we’re the hottest economic country in the world, but they’re also coming up because you have people like that Governor say, “Come on up. We’ll give you healthcare. Come.” Who wouldn’t come up? Who wouldn’t come up? How crazy is this? How crazy is this? Schools, healthcare.
Democrats have never been farther outside the mainstream. Liberal politicians want to eliminate private healthcare and force everyone onto the government plan. Remember the lies from the previous Administration. If you like your plan, you can keep your plan. If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor. Twenty-eight time, one lie after another. Twenty-eight times it was said, and it turned out to be a total lie. [booing]
Every major Democrat running for President supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would raid Medicare and destroy the private health insurance plans of millions of American families that they love. [booing] My administration is defending your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. [cheers and applause]
So, we got rid of the individual mandate, which was the most unpopular part of Obamacare. And we’re running it better. You know, I had a political decision. Do I make it great? Alex Azar our secretary, do we run it well and sort of say, “Hey, we run it well.” Or do we run it badly and have everybody upset?” We said, “We gotta run it well,” but it’s still much too expensive. It’s lousy healthcare. But we got rid of the worst part of it. Individual mandate. Individual mandate, where you have the privilege of buying the right not to have to pay for expensive insurance that’s no-good health insurance. And we won’t--and you gotta remember this--Republicans, and I speak for every one of them, we will always protect pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] We’re going to protect, always. Right? Got to do it.
And as you know, Democrats even want to give free healthcare to illegal immigrants. [booing] As long as I'm your president I will never, ever let Democrats take away your healthcare, and give it away free to people that have entered our country illegally. We can't do that. It's a tremendous incentive to come in. Democrats also want to bring in unlimited numbers of foreign refugees from overseas, all at the expense of supporting their own communities. Republicans, no matter what you do, where you are, we want people to obey our laws. You want people that are going to help our country.
The Democrat party has never been farther outside of the mainstream. Every major Democrat running for president supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would raid Medicare, force private doctors out of medicine, and lead to the rationing of life-saving treatments. And, you know, they're gonna take away your private healthcare, your private insurance, 180 million people will lose with what they want to do. It's a disaster. You know, it's like, did you ever really sort of feel where you don't even have to treat people nicely? You don't have any choice, you have to vote for me. I can leave right now. I can say, "North Carolina, I've had it with you. I'm leaving right now." And you know what? You got to go out and vote. What are you going to do? Put one of these crazy people running our country again?
My administration is defending your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. Remember President Obama? Twenty-eight times, remember 28 times, they counted them, and there's much more than that, I would imagine, that you can choose your plan, you can choose your doctor. It didn't work out that way, did it? Obamacare, and we're keeping Obamacare alive. We got rid of the individual mandate, the worst part of Obamacare. [cheering] We're keeping it and running it as well as it can, but the premiums are too high, the deductibles are through the roof, it's ridiculous. And we're coming up with Lindsey Graham and all of the folks, we're coming up with a great healthcare plan that if we take back to the house. That's why Dan and Greg, if we take back the House, if we keep the Senate, and maybe even increase it a little bit, wouldn't be bad, and on the assumption we keep the presidency, you're going to have great healthcare.
Incredible, the strides that we've made. We will defeat the Democrat effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, and education by liberating Americans from their endless push for a job-killing, soul-crushing Washington regulations. As an example, we're trying to get the car companies, gonna give them a little bit of extra energy, and they'll be able to build a car that consumers can buy, which will be better than the car they make today.
Every major Democrat running for president supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would destroy Medicare as we know it today. My administration will protect Medicare and defend your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. [cheers and applause] And we will always protect patients with preexisting conditions. The Republicans will always do that. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 50 years. You don't hear this because the fake news doesn't wanna write about it. [booing]
The AIDS epidemic in this country will be gone within 10 years. We've already started the process. It's been funded. It's been funded. Who would've thought that? Honestly, when I ran, I didn't know that. We have now the technology and what they've done with respect to AIDS is incredible. What a terrible, terrible period of time the world went through, but we will have it ended within 10 years. We will defeat the effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, light bulbs. Right? They took away our light bulb. I want an incandescent light. I want to look better, okay?
He promised to stand with our veterans and give our veterans access to the real-time world-class healthcare that you earned, we reformed the VA, and Veterans Choice is now available for every veteran. [cheers and applause] And this president promised to secure our border, we made historic investments in border security. Apprehensions on our Southern border are already down by 60%. And we've already started to build that wall on the Southern border of the United States. We're doing it.
Think of it, a President of the United States who's made our economy, with a lot of help from all of you, frankly, but from Mike and from some of our great senators and some of our great people that we have with us, we made this the strongest economy in our history. We've rebuilt our military. We're taking care of healthcare like nobody's been able to do. What we've done is incredible. And by the way, we're protecting your Second Amendment. If you don't have me, your Second Amendment is gone. [cheers and applause]
My administration is also fighting the Democrat socialist healthcare agenda that would obliterate Medicare. Republicans will protect Medicare, and we will always protect patients with preexisting conditions. [cheers and applause] And for those of you that have private healthcare, health insurance, 180 million people, they are going to end it, obliterate it, and most people are thrilled with it. We are going to leave it. You're gonna have your plan the way you want it. And there's no plan like those plans.
The President. Thank you, fellas very much, appreciated. Okay, you got to do it tomorrow, let's go get a runoff and one of these two guys are fantastic. Let's vote tomorrow for the entire Republican ticket, just vote. We're also delighted to be joined by two really good friends of mine. These are warriors, these are warriors. Different types of people, but equally, I mean, they fight for you and they love this state, and they love this country. One, hears a strange name when I first heard. He called me up, "Sir," they said, "there's a man named John Kennedy on the phone." I said, "Who?" "He's running for the Senate in a state that likes you a lot." I said, "Where?" "Louisiana." [cheers and applause] And I said, "Let me check it out." And it was true, there was a man named John Kennedy, a very successful guy, a brilliant guy. You're not going to know what this means because I'm a big, like student, I like academics, believe it or not. People don't know. My uncle was a professor for 35 years or something at M.I.T. I like that stuff. He went to Oxford. Oxford's like, as good as it gets. And he was a great student at Oxford, you know he puts on that country stuff all the time, but I want to tell you. And we know the country smarter than the other guys anyway. But–so John Kennedy goes it, "I'd love to have your support. I'd really love it if I could." But I said, "John, to me, you're the real John Kennedy, you're the real deal," and we came down. It was–I'll never forget, it was a Friday night, and it was this massive airplane hangar someplace. I don't know where the hell I–all I know is in your great state. And we had thousands and thousands of people show up. And I looked at him and I liked him, and I looked at that crowd, I said, "You know what? I think you're going to win tomorrow." The election was on a Saturday and John Kennedy won by a lot. It was a great thing and a great thing for our country. Where is John Kennedy? John, come here, come here, come here John. And then, we have another guy. Any time I talk about healthcare. Anytime, I want to know anything about medical, anytime I want to know anything about taking care of people, I call a man named Bill Cassidy. He's incredible. What a heart, what a heart. Come on up here, John. Come here, John. Oxford. [applause]
In a recent Democratic debate, every single Democrat Presidential candidate raised their hand, in favor of giving free government healthcare, to illegal aliens. [booing] And then, you wonder why they come to America? Why wouldn't they come? Free healthcare, free education, free everything. And I jokingly said one time–and everybody then gets a Rolls-Royce. And the fake news said, "President Trump, lied. He said that the illegal immigrants all get a Rolls-Royce." They don't have a lot of sense of humor. That's the problem with this press, what a bunch of dopes. Free Rolls-Royce. "The President told a lie. They don't get a Rolls-Royce." I'm only kidding about the Rolls-Royce. I just don't want to have a story. You know, I have a bad story. I did it again. I promised the Rolls. I–I was just kidding.
We've taken swift action to lower the price of health care for working families with new options that cost up to 60% less than failed Obamacare. And we got rid of the individual mandate in Obamacare, the most–the most unpopular unfair thing. That's why you pay a fortune, for the privilege of not having to pay a fortune, for your healthcare. So, you're paying not to have to pay, it's terrible. Anyway, I got rid of it. It's a big deal. That's a big deal. That was not easy. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 50 years. You see that. And we're bringing them down much lower and we're even going to give our states. You know, the drug industry has it pretty well wired. Drugs are very expensive. Outside, in other countries, you can buy the exact same drug for 50%, 60, 70% less than you pay. Same drug, same factory, same company. So, it's not like it's different. I just gave Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida, and I'm giving other governors the right to go to Canada and other states and other countries, other countries. To buy the drugs, because they pay much less. We can cut our prices by 50, 60, 70% in some cases. So, we're giving states the rights to go to other countries and make a deal on drugs. It's easier than going through this horrible system where the Democrats refuse to allow you to do anything to cut the price of drugs. They don't want to let you do it. To help patients with life threatening conditions, we passed–I love it–right to try. So, if you're terminally ill, if you're very sick, we have the best doctors and labs, technicians in the world. They have so many different things, but it will be four, five, six years. You couldn't get it. You know why? You're terminally ill, and they tell them we don't want to make you sick. You're terminally ill, you're going to be around for four weeks. And they say, "We can't give you this drug because it may hurt you." For 50 years, they have been trying to get it. Not that easy. You'll not going to get it pretty quickly.
But if Democrats seize power, they would throw the floodgates wide open, wide open. We would have people coming into our country, look at what's going on in California, and the people of California don't want it, they say, "Come into California. We'll give you free healthcare, free education." Why wouldn't ... I may even move to California if they keep going. No, but all it does is it brings everybody in. What's wrong with these people? We're rebuilding our military stronger than ever before and we are not going to deplete it again on stupid, senseless, endless wars. [cheers and applause] We've invested more than two and a half trillion dollars restoring our armed forces and all of it was built in the USA—[cheers and applause]—and that includes approving the construction of almost 200 F-35 fighters, stealth, stealth. And many of them are built right here, right here. You know that, right? In Fort Worth. [cheers and applause] As we restore our security, we're also restoring our prosperity. America is winning again and America is respected again. [cheers and applause] And by the way, I have to say this, so outside they have close to 30,000 people. And I wonder if I could ask the Fire Marshal, fill up this little area, let them in, it would be so nice. You know they have a certain max, we broke the record tonight. [cheers and applause] Good place.
Every single Democrat candidate for president raised their hand in favor of giving free healthcare to all illegal aliens. [booing] They wanna give more to illegal aliens than they give to American citizens. You see that. As president, I will never allow the Democrats to take away your healthcare dollars and give them to people that are in our country illegally. Can't do it. [cheers and applause]
In fact, I just signed an executive action to protect American healthcare benefits for all American citizens. Among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are millions of legal immigrants right here in Texas, including millions of patriotic, hardworking Mexican-Americans who play by the rules, pay their taxes, follow our laws, and strengthen our communities. [cheers and applause] Whether you are a first-generation or tenth-generation, and every American citizen, and you do, you've been treated so badly. But you're not being treated badly anymore. You know? We got rid of the individual mandate from crazy Obamacare. [cheers and applause] Every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, your borders, and is always loyal to you for a change. We're loyal to you. [cheers and applause]
While we're fighting for shared priorities, the American people, the Democrat Party has never been farther outside of the mainstream. They've gone nuts. Every Democrat running for president is pushing a healthcare agenda that would utterly eviscerate Medicare. My administration will always protect Medicare for our beloved seniors. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause]
But Stacey Abrams wants to give illegal aliens the right to vote. Do you believe this? [booing] I mean, some of these people, they wanna give them education. They wanna give them this. They wanna give them free healthcare. They wanna give these people, that come into our country illegally ...
The Democrat party has never been more extreme, you know that, than it is today. The Democrat healthcare agenda would obliterate Medicare. I will always protect Medicare for our seniors, and we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. Always. We'll always take care of them. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are becoming more extreme and militant by the day. The Democrats' planned government takeover of healthcare would obliterate Medicare. What are they doing? I will always protect Medicare for our nation's seniors. It's going to be protected. What they're doing is crazy. [cheers and applause] And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] And we will also protect you with pre-existing physicians. How about that? Pre-existing physicians. First time I've ever said that, just thought of that. True. Because under their plan, you don't get your own doctor. You know what you get? Whatever the hell you get. That's what you get. "Oh great, doc, fix me up doc. You mean you wanna work on my heart? Who are you, doc?" I don't think so.
Edwards is totally owned by the Liberal trial lawyers, who are causing your state insurance rates and car insurance to skyrocket through the roof. Perhaps, most disturbing, Edwards has allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of dollars and healthcare from hardworking Louisiana citizens. [booing] He cares more about illegal aliens than he cares about Louisiana citizens. I'll tell what, I love our military, Eddie loves our military. [applause] They care more about illegal aliens than taking care of our vets and taking care of our military. Edwards is dangerously soft on crime, you know that.
If you want to show your love and support for American law enforcement and just plain success of your state and your country, then vote early for Eddie Rispone. Democrats are becoming more extreme by the day. The Democrats plan government takeover of healthcare would demolish your Medicare. I will always protect Medicare for our nation's seniors. We will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions, and we will also protect patients with pre-existing physicians. [applause]
But just to finish up, he's in the pocket of the trial lawyers who have sent your car insurance rate to the highest level anywhere in the United States. [booing] It's crazy. He allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of healthcare dollars from hardworking Louisiana families, and John Bel Edwards supports illegal aliens, not American citizens. It's pretty, it's pretty simple. [booing]
Sanctuary cities have adopted a policy now of lawless anarchy aimed at innocent civilians. They deliberately release dangerous criminals onto our streets out of our jails. It's crazy, republicans believe our cities should be sanctuaries for law abiding Americans not for criminal aliens [applause]. In the Democrat Presidential debate, every single Democrat candidate raised their hand and pledged to give illegal aliens free healthcare, courtesy of you, the American taxpayer. [booing]
And it wouldn't be much different in the State of Pennsylvania, that I can tell you. But you know, somebody that believes in that is Sleepy Joe Biden. He was caught telling a far-left radical activist that he would shut down fossil fuel production in Pennsylvania. You saw that. But the voters of this Commonwealth will never, ever let that happen. [applause] Can you imagine a guy coming in, whether it's him or anybody else? They all want to do it. He just raises his hand--he has no clue what he's doing. They raise their hand. Remember he looked? Do you want to give illegal aliens healthcare, even though we're taking it away from our own soldiers that are up--and he looks and they're all raising their hand? Did you see that? Well, he, "Oh, oh, oh, okay, I'll do it too."
Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, illegal crossings are down 75% since May and the wall is going up at a very rapid pace. [applause] The radical Democrats have gotten more and more extreme. And that's why they did this impeachment hoax, because Nancy Pelosi had absolutely no control. She knew what was going to happen. She knew. The radical left has taken over the Democrat party. Democrats are pushing for a socialist takeover of healthcare that would strip you of the doctor and coverage of your choice. We have 180 million people with private healthcare that love it. They're going to take it away from you. I don't think so.
And by the way, this is for a hundred years. I'm not just talking about this little point in time. The Republicans are known as, it's always harder to stick together. These people are great. We have a great Republican Party, and we have to get that change. We have to take back the house. You'll have the greatest healthcare ever if we take--and by the way, we had another victory. The individual mandate, just a little while ago, it came over the wires, it was just upheld. The individual mandate is now gone. The most unpopular part of Obamacare. [applause] It was just upheld.
So, we want to take back the House, we'll hold the Senate, and we'll keep the White House. You will have the greatest healthcare. You will continue with the greatest judges. You know, we have judges that are--we just had a great story in the Wall Street Journal. I have to tell, I have to be always very truthful, because if I'm a little bit off, they call me a liar. They'll say, "He gets a Pinocchio," the stupid Washington Post, they have Pinocchio. I mean, even if you're like saying things perfectly, it's a Pinocchio. There's nothing you can say where you don't get a Pinocchio. But what happens, what happens is we have Wall Street Journal the other day got the best story. They said, "Whether you like him or not, the job he's done on judges and Supreme Court Justices, but the job he's done on judges is amazing. Say it's the most important thing. See, I don't agree. I say defense is the most, the military is the most. But once you're beyond the military, I mean to me defense is the most important. Because without good defense, maybe we don't need judges so much, right? It's like somebody said, "Well, we violated the budget." I said, "Do me a favor, don't worry about the budget. If we're attacked and aren't doing very well and somebody says, 'Well, at least we have a good budget,' that doesn't work too well." Right? That doesn't work. So, we have great military, we have great judges, we have great everything.
Carolyn Maloney, give that money back. Every penny should come back. They act so pompous. They act so righteous. They're not righteous. They're not righteous. They're bad people. The far-left Democrats have never been more extreme than they are now. Democrats are pushing a socialist takeover of healthcare that will take away your coverage and take away your doctor. 180 million people are going to lose. A lot of people here now have healthcare finally under us that's phenomenal. And that's what you want. They want to take it away, 180. They want you to go to a hospital ward someplace and sit there all night. I don't think so. Not in this group. And you know what? Some people, it's good some people, but can you imagine? They want to take away 180 million people, great, private, highly negotiated healthcare where you have your own doctor. Remember Obama? 28 times, 28 times, "You can have your doctor, you can have your plan." Didn't work out that way, did it? I think we should impeach him for that. Let's impeach him, for that, for the IRS scandal, for the guns. Remember the guns, he was giving them to anybody that wanted them. He gave guns to the worst people in the world and then they didn't have them registered, right? Not to good. Impeach him. Why didn't the Republicans impeach him? Those were really, how about giving around $1.8 billion in cash? How about that? [booing]
If they have something that they're pretty sure is gonna work but is going to take another six years, I brought those times way back, by the way, way down, but they would travel to Asia, they would travel to Europe, they would travel all over the world to try and get a cure, because we wouldn't sell them the medicine because we didn't want to take a chance on making the people sick. I said, "Wait a minute, they're gonna die. They're going to die." "Well, sir, we can't take the liability." I said, "Then we'll draw up a statement assessing all liability, taking all liability away from the country, away from the insurance companies, away from the healthcare companies, away from the doctors." [cheers and applause]
But the Democrats are pushing a socialist takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private insurance plans and massively raise taxes on the middle class. A lot of you have private insurance plans that you love. They're gonna take them away from you. But see, I don't like doing this too soon. I did it with Pocahontas, I came up with this great name. I came up with a lot of different stuff. I said she was a total fraud and everybody believed me and she went down. Then she started coming up and then she went down. It doesn't help me to do it a year and a half before the election. That's why, like with the Green New Deal, okay? I wanna say great things about it. Okay? I don't wanna knock it and then they say, "Oh, we're not gonna use that." I like it when they say, "No longer can you fly airplanes. No longer can you have any cows in the pasture. Right? No longer can we do anything." We can't do anything anymore. No, the Green New Deal, I love it. I think it's great. It should be debated. It should be debated.
Bernie Sanders' healthcare plan would cost over 32 trillion dollars a year. That's more money than we make in five years. That's more money than we'll ever make. He is indeed crazy. No, no, he's ... Oh, let me take that back. No, it's a great plan that we have to consider strongly. [laughter] We have to consider his plan strongly. Now see, I'll tell you what the fake news will do. They'll take my last words, "It's a great plan. We have to consider it strongly." They'll cut everything out in the front and they'll say, "Donald Trump is in favor of Bernie Sanders' Green New Deal." [booing] They can do more with a tape than they can do with a newspaper. No, they'll do that. You'll see it. Somewhere you'll see it, "Trump supports his plan." They are sick.
But taking their cues from socialist Bernie Sanders, AOC, all these people. Liberal lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private health insurance. Many of you have great insurance. Republicans will never let that happen. They'll probably change their mind before the— See, this is why I don't like talking about it now. I'd rather wait six, seven, eight months, let them say it 5, 000 times when they have to do it, and then talk. I'm talkin too early about it. I shouldn't even be here tonight, but I love the people of Wisconsin. [cheers and applause]
And I'm also very proud to report that we won a critical Supreme Court victory yesterday on immigration. [cheers and applause] We will now be finally able to enforce federal law, and ensure that those seeking admission to our country are able to support themselves financially and not abuse taxpayer-funded programs. [cheers and applause] They were killing our country, killing our country. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. Frankly, they're crazy. These people are crazy. They're taking their cues from socialists like Bernie. Left-wing lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private healthcare plans, which many people like. [booing] The plans of every Democrat running for President would demolish the economy of New Jersey, where half a million new New Jersey workers are employed at some of the best and most innovative healthcare employment companies. We have them working at the companies, and we have people getting great healthcare. It's been so long. It's finally working and they wanna destroy it.
The Republican party will never let it happen. We are saving your healthcare while the Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare, take away your doctors, take away all of the good care that we fought, and we fought hard, and we're doing well and now we're doing better. And by the way, some time prior to the end of the year, we're putting in for a new middle income tax cut, a very big one. [cheers and applause] But we're making healthcare better and much, much cheaper. We've done a great job in running it and we've given you a lot of alternatives. We are protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will, the Republican party, pre-existing conditions, we saved it. We are stopping surprise medical billing and making everything transparent. That's a big deal—[cheers and applause]—and that will take effect starting in about two months from now. Everything's transparent. You'll be able to see pricing. You'll be able to go and price other hospitals, other doctors. It's gonna be an incredible thing. Nobody believes I was able to do it, but we did it. [cheers and applause]
We are protecting Medicare for our nation's seniors. Democrats want, and you know this, Democrats wanna raid Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. [booing] And you know, we all have a heart. We all have a heart, but when you tell people to come into our country, like this clown governor of California, come into our country, come. They're all gonna come. If they think they're going to get free education, free healthcare, they're all gonna come. If you don't say it, they're not gonna come. Because who would even think this?
As I told a rally of veterans today at Council Bluffs, thanks to President Trump's leadership, we're finally giving our veterans access to the real-time world-class healthcare that you earned in the uniform of the United States. Veterans' Choice is now available for every veteran in America. [cheers and applause] Thank you.
The Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders' government healthcare takeover bill. It's a takeover of your healthcare that would strip all of those 180 million great Americans of your private coverage. You don't want that. You got great deals. You're able to negotiate, you're able to keep your doctor, keep your area, keep your hospitals, keep everything that you wanted. Now they wanna take it away. Report to an operating room when you have a cold, okay? In your local hospital. I don't think so. One hundred and eighty million people, but I'm not gonna knock it because I want Bernie to bring it right up to the end and we'll debate it the day before the election. Okay? [cheers and applause] We are saving your healthcare while socialist Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare.
And Sleepy Joe has no idea what he's even talking-- He doesn't even know what he's talking about. He's so lost. Honestly, that poor guys is so lost. They talk healthcare. She said, "It's over for him." It was over for him, actually, if you knew him, a long time ago. Now it's really over.
We are making healthcare better and cheaper. We got rid of the individual mandate, the most unpopular thing—[cheers and applause]—which essentially killed Obamacare. We are protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will, the Republican party. [cheers and applause] We're stopping surprise medical billing and making everything totally transparent. And I signed it already. Everything now is going to transparencies, where hospitals, doctors, everybody has to tell you how much things are costing. Watch those prices come down. [cheers and applause] Right? Right?
I have an expert on healthcare. He said transparency because it's a big deal. It's a big deal. Nobody else would have gotten it done, that I can tell you. Transparency is bigger than healthcare because you will see prices tumbling like you wouldn't believe. People go in for a blood test, they get charged 2,700 dollars. Down the road they get the same test for 57 dollars. The same exact test. Maybe it's better. Maybe it's better. It's crazy. When you have transparency it's all gonna come, you watch. You watch. But this person, a real expert, said, "This is bigger than healthcare," and I got it done. Unfortunately it won't really start kicking in until after the election because it takes a period of time. They have certain statutory requirements, et cetera.
I had a choice, do we run it well or do we run it poorly? If we run it poorly everyone's gonna blame me. If we run it well everyone's gonna give him credit, especially the fakers back there, right? [laughter] But you know what? We gotta run it well but we're coming up with a healthcare that if we win the House we will have the best healthcare of any country in the world, by far. [cheers and applause]
We have transformed veterans' healthcare, including VA Choice. The best. You know, I think I'm a totally brilliant human being. I think I'm the smartest person, so, so I came up with a plan. I'll never forget, I was in New Hampshire, I came up with this idea because everybody kept coming up to me and saying, "Sir, it's really terrible what's happening with healthcare. We're waiting in line for two weeks, for four weeks, for seven weeks." Honestly, people were waiting in line, they weren't very sick, they were terminally ill, truthfully, before they saw a doctor. By the time they got to the doctor. So I came up with this incredible plan. Only I could think of this. I said, "Here's what you do. Here's what you do, if somebody can't get a doctor quickly," because we have great doctors at the VA. They don't get enough credit. "If you can't get to a doctor quickly you go outside, you go locally, you get a doctor, we pay the bill, you get yourself all better." Right?
And I know the people of Iowa don't care about this but we are making substantial investments in rural healthcare. We are combating the opioid epidemic. Drug overdose deaths have declined for the first time in nearly 31 years. That's a great thing. [cheers and applause] And our great First Lady is helping us with that. That is such a big thing for Melania. [cheers and applause] Big, big thing. She is really involved.
And we will never let the Democrats give away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, especially when we say, "Come in. Come in, we'll give you healthcare." You know, it's one thing they come in and it's a rough situation because we all have hearts but when people are saying, like in California this wacky governor, he says, "Come in, we're gonna give you healthcare. We're gonna give you free education. We're gonna give you everything. We're gonna give you a beautiful Rolls-Royce." See to show you how fake they are one of the newscasters said, "Donald Trump said that the governor of California promised a Rolls-Royce to illegal immigrants. He didn't promise them. This was a lie and a misrepresentation by President Trump." They can't take a little humor. They can't take it. These people are sick. They're sick. [booing] No. They're sick people.
And African American poverty numbers have hit the lowest rate ever recorded. Wages for African American workers have increased by $2,400 per year, also a record. And you know this. For decades, the Democrat party has betrayed African Americans. They betrayed us all. They betrayed all of us. But we're delivering for African Americans. We're delivering for Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans like nobody has ever done. We are fighting for great jobs, great schools, great healthcare, and a truly great future for our country and for them. We are the party of equal opportunity for all Americans. [applause]
Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They want to let anyone into our country from all around the world. Just come on in, folks, we're going to give you free healthcare. We're going to give you free education. [booing] We're going to give you more than our vets are getting. We're going to give you--every family will get a free Rolls Royce. You know I said that, Matt. I said that to them and some of the fake news picked it up and they said, "President Trump said every family coming into our country illegally gets a brand-new free Rolls Royce. He lied. He lied. He lied." They gave me a Pinocchio. They don't get it, Matt, do they, Matt? Actually, they get it better than we understand. They get it very well. They get it. They know what's happening. And the wall is being built. I will tell you the wall is being built. [applause] And you know they went after us on everybody knows the wall is going up. So, what's happening--you know, you do know who's paying for the wall, don't you? Right. Redemption from illegal aliens that are coming. The redemption money is paying for the wall. They're so sad to hear that because it's okay, finally, they go. You have to understand an entire party is fighting. They'll give me anything I want. Our military would rebuilt it. 2.2, it's really $2.5 trillion over a period of three years. They give me anything but not 10 cents for the wall. They said, "We like drones." Well, drones don't keep people out. Drones are wonderful. They fly around, take pictures. We're going to give you a drone. No good. So, we now have built over 100 miles of wall. [applause]
Remember this. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. Taking their cues from crazy Bernie, 132 congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover that would strip 180 million Americans of their very, very coveted private coverage. [booing] The Democrat party wants to run your healthcare, but they can't even run a caucus in Iowa. [applause] By the way, it's a week, a week. You know I turned on at seven o'clock. I wanted to see who won. They said, "There's a little problem." Little did they know? Does anybody—it's now a week—does anybody know who won Iowa? [pauses for crowd chatter] I don't know. Maybe Rand or Lindsey. Rand, does anybody know who won? Lindsey, you're a total pro. Nobody knows. He said nobody. Flip a coin. Flip a coin. Flip a coin. They're going to run your health care. Unbelievable. Nobody knows who won. Actually, I think they're trying to take it away from Bernie again. I think Bernie came in second. Can you believe it? They're doing it to you again, Bernie. They're doing it to you again.
We're saving your healthcare while the socialist Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare. We are making healthcare better and much, much cheaper. You've seen what we did. [applause] We are protecting people with preexisting conditions and we always will. The Republican party always will. Always will. And we got rid of the most unpopular thing in the healthcare world, the individual mandate. We had to pay a fortune not to have pay a fortune. You paid a fortune not to pay a fortune for bad healthcare. And we got rid of it, saved a lot of money for a lot of people. And we're stopping surprise medical bills and making everything transparent. That's bigger than healthcare transparency and that'll go unfortunately into effect right around the election time. It would be nice if we could get it earlier, but it's all done. It's all signed.
So finally, it's my great honor to introduce a tremendous person, a great fighter pilot. A lot of people don't know that. She's a great fighter pilot and a warrior Senate. She helped us so much during the impeachment hoax, she didn't wobble one bit, Martha McSally. [cheers and applause] You know, Martha's tough on the border. And she's working with me to strengthen our military still further, and lower your prescription drug prices, and we're making a lot of progress. But her opponent, I have to say this Martha, a guy named Mark Kelly. [booing] Even the Democrats don't like him much. He wants to raise your taxes, open your borders, give away free healthcare to illegal immigrants, and he wants to obliterate your Second Amendment. He wants to get rid of it. [booing]
Before I came into office, the far left's policy of open borders allowed deadly drugs to flow freely into our country, poisoning our children. Including, as you know very well right here in Arizona, Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They wanna let anyone from around the world simply walk across the border. And then they wanna give them a lifetime of free welfare, healthcare, everything. They wanna give them everything. [booing] For a long period of time, they were treated— And you know this, before I came, they were treated far better than our veterans were treated. Now our veterans are treated great. [cheers and applause] True.
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme, taking cues from Crazy Bernie Sanders. How's he doing tonight? [shouting] One hundred and thirty-two congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover of the world. Think of this, 180 million Americans are gonna lose healthcare coverage under this plan. But if you don't mind, I'm not gonna criticize it tonight. Let them keep going and I'll start talking about it about two weeks out from the election. Okay? Because I don't want him to change. Please don't change.
No, she— I did it too early. I would have saved it, but I guess it was effective. She's essentially gone-zo, so— One of those things. While the socialist Democrats are trying to destroy American healthcare and your social security, my administration is protecting your social security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. And that's what we're getting. [cheers and applause] That's right.
One of the big secrets. The Democrats won't let us say it. They wanna keep that as quiet as possible. Look what they gave you, the worst healthcare. And what we've done, we've gotten rid of things that nobody could believe that were so bad for you. Everybody was happy with defending your right to keep your doctor and plan of your choice. We're making healthcare better and much, much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the last five years before I took office, we are now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive than they were, and it's better healthcare. A lot of people don't know this. People don't know this. They think that's their issue. It's not. They failed on healthcare. We're protecting people with preexisting conditions, and we always will. And by the way, we're trying to get rid of Obamacare, but we're managing it incredibly, but we're trying to get rid so we can give you a great healthcare plan and protect preexisting conditions. Remember that. [cheers and applause] We're trying to get rid of it, but while we're having it, we're managing it really much better than they did. Remember they built the 5 billion dollar website? Remember that? It was supposed to cost 5 million dollars. It cost 5 billion dollars. Five billion.
I mean, you could get a kid out of high school. I have a son. He's a young boy, 13. He uses a computer. He could have given them a healthcare site. I would say he would have charged them 100 dollars, Barron Trump, and it would've worked. He's so good. "Hi dad. How you doing, dad? How's it going?" Bing, bing, bong. I said, "Don't play with that while you're talking to me." "Why, what's going on, dad?" These kids are incredible, right? The kids, they make us look like babies with that. But he could have given you a great site for about 2 dollars. They spent 5 billion dollars on a site that never worked. By the way, speaking of that, how did they do with their vote count in Iowa? [laughter]
So then we won Wisconsin, and then we won Michigan because those companies, now they're pouring back in. The auto companies are pouring back in, and Wisconsin's doing great with the farmers that Canada was taking. You know, Canada was charging our farmers 287% tariffs for dairy products. Okay? So what happens is this, we're working on healthcare. We're fighting to stop surprise medical billing. I just signed an executive order imposing price transparency because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very fast. We've approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the brand drugs, but they cost a tiny fraction. We've totally transformed veterans' healthcare, including getting long-sought VA Choice and VA Accountability, which they said could not be done. [cheers and applause]
Look, there was a dangerous thing that happened in 2016. It was the normalization of socialism by Bernie Sanders. [booing] The most dangerous thing was the normalization of socialism by Bernie Sanders, because what happened? Candidates started running as socialists. They embraced the platform. And today, there aren't shades of socialism. They are running to the left on a socialist platform. They wanna take our guns, they wanna take our healthcare, that's their platform. What they say they will do. Colorado, are we gonna let it happen?
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme, taking cues from Crazy Bernie Sanders, 132 Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover that would strip 180 million Americans of their great private coverage that you want. [booing] While the socialist Democrats are trying to destroy American healthcare, and trying to destroy your social security, that won't happen with me, my administration is protecting your social security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great, great healthcare, already done a good job. [cheers and applause] We're defending your right to keep the doctor, and to keep the plan of your choice. Remember, President Obama, 28 times, he said, "Keep your doctor. Keep your plan. Keep your doctor. Keep your plan. Keep your doctor. Keep your plan." Right? It was a lie. We should impeach him. We should impeach him. [cheers and applause] Impeach Obama. Get him out of office.
We're making healthcare better and much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the five years before I took office. We're now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive and they're better. They're better. [cheers and applause] We're protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will. We're fighting to stop surprise medical billing. I signed an executive order imposing price transparency. That's gonna be bigger than healthcare in a certain way. Watch the prices come down, because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very, very fast. We have approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the name-brand drugs, but at a tiny fraction of the cost.
He said, "It doesn't matter, you'll beat them all." [cheers and applause] I hope so. I hope so. So who is easier to beat, Crazy Bernie—[cheers and applause]—or Sleepy Joe? [cheers and applause] They think Bernie's easier to beat. [cheers and applause] They think Bernie's easier to beat. So whether it's Bernie Sanders's plan to eliminate private healthcare, Elizabeth Warren's plan—I told you that I had more Indian blood in me than her, even though I have none. I have none. Zero. I have none. I have none. I said I have more Indian blood in me than she has. And she choked. She said, "I'm gonna show, I'm gonna show ..." She hired this company and they went out and did a blood test. One thousand twenty-fourth, right? [laughter] So that means I probably won somewhere down the line a million years ago. [laughter]
Senator Scott is a leading—[cheers and applause]—superstar. [cheers and applause] He's a superstar. [cheers and applause] But he is a leader in lowering healthcare costs like nobody has done it. You know, people don't know, but in the last year, prescription drug prices came down for the first time in 51 years. [cheers and applause] And that was with no Democrat help. If we had the help, we could lower it by 50%. But we'll get their help. One of these days, they're gonna get smart. Senator Scott provides world-class care for our veterans. What he's done for our veterans is incredible. And bringing investment to distressed communities across our country through Opportunity Zones, including 135 right here in South Carolina. That's what it is. Tim Scott came to my office with an idea. He said, "Opportunity zone." I said, "Tim, what the hell is that?" What is it? Right, Tim?
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders's healthcare takeover. They wanna take away your healthcare. While the Washington Democrats are trying to destroy your healthcare and to destroy your Social Security, that's what's going to happen, my administration is protecting your Social Security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. [cheers and applause] And we are defending your right to keep the doctor and to keep your plan of choice. You remember when President Obama would say, "You can keep your doctor. You could keep your plan," 28 times. [shouting] He said, "You can keep your doctor and you can keep your plan." Well, he lied. [shouting] We should impeach him. [cheers and applause] We should impeach him for that. He lied 28 times. "You'll keep your doctor, keep your plan. It's wonderful. Great." Went through the roof. We're doing a great job.
We killed the individual mandate, which is the most unbelievable, horrible. [cheers and applause] And it's not really Obamacare anymore, but we're running the hulk of it and we're trying to kill it entirely, and then we will put it back. You'll have great healthcare, and preexisting conditions will be totally protected. Preexisting conditions will be totally protected. [cheers and applause] We're making healthcare better and much cheaper. While premiums more than doubled in the five years before I took office, we are now offering plans already that are up to 60% less expensive than the old Obamacare. Think of that and better. And better. [cheers and applause]
We are stopping surprise medical billing, a disgrace. And I signed an executive order imposing price transparency, because when providers are required to show their prices, which they don't have to do, but now they do, those same prices fall very, very fast. We have approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the name-brand drugs, but at a tiny fraction of the cost. They're just as good. I always like a name brand. I mean, there's something. There's no difference. Probably sometimes they're better. We've totally transformed veterans' healthcare, getting long-sought VA Choice and VA Accountability passed after 50 years. [cheers and applause]
But they've embraced an extreme left-wing agenda. Their plans would massively raise your taxes, destroy our liberty, muzzle our faith, and erase our sovereignty. You know that. The Democrat party has gone crazy. Whether it's Bernie Sanders's plan to eliminate private healthcare, Elizabeth Pocahontas's plan ... By the way, she's history. She's history. I came up with that name far too early, I should've just waited. But it didn't matter. I thought she was making a come back. I said, "Wow, I just did it to her."
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders's healthcare takeover. While the Washington Democrats are trying to destroy your healthcare and your Social Security, and they are going to destroy your Social Security. Remember they used to say with me, "I'm gonna end it the first day." Well, you know what, we're gonna soon be four years and all I've done is make it stronger. You know that. My administration is protecting your Social Security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. You're going to have great healthcare. We are defending your right to keep the doctor and to keep the plan of your choice.
Remember President Obama? "You can keep your doctor. You can keep your plan," 28 times. They said, "Impeach him. You should impeach him." Twenty-eight times he lied, 28 times he said that ... Twenty-eight times on record, "You can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan." Well, that's not true. It wasn't true. Impeach him. We're making healthcare better and much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the last five years before I took office. We are now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive and they're better plans. [cheers and applause] We are protecting people with preexisting conditions and we always will, and we are trying to terminate, in the Supreme Court of the United States, the worst healthcare in the world, and we are going to give you the best healthcare you've ever seen at a lower price and again, protecting preexisting conditions. Right? Protecting preexisting conditions.
I signed an executive order imposing price transparency, that's gonna be bigger than healthcare, because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very, very fast. Right? It's a big thing. That's a big thing. We've approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as name-brand drugs, but a fraction of the cost. We've, we have given them, and there's a lot of political pressure not to do that, you can understand why.
Korea, I renegotiated the deal. I took a horrible deal. That was a Hillary Clinton special. That was a Hillary Clinton special. She said, "We have to make this deal with South Korea. It's going to mean 250,000 jobs." And she was right, for South Korea, 250,000. [shouting] And China's entry into the World Trade Organization was supported by Sleepy Joe Biden. That was one of the worst deals economically in the history of our country. When China joined the World Trade Organization, they became— They were flatline for decades. They became like a rocket ship. He voted for the war in Iraq. He voted for mass amnesty for illegal aliens. He supports sanctuary cities and now Biden wants to end immigration enforcement and require, he wants to require you to provide free healthcare for millions and millions of illegal aliens, okay? [booing]
Give free healthcare to illegal aliens. You don't get free healthcare? Expand deadly sanctuary cities. Force taxpayers to subsidize late-term abortion. Shut down the energy fields of Pennsylvania. They want to shut them down. No fossil fuel. No fossil fuel. Texas isn't too happy, either. Go to Texas. I just left Texas a little while ago, two weeks. I said, they don't want energy, they don't want guns, and they don't want religion. A guy stands up, says, "Not going to win Texas!" But you have the same thing, because you do a big, you're a big fracking state. You want to see your taxes go up? Stop fracking. Doesn't hurt you at all, fracking. They want to throw up windmills that are going to ruin your houses. I mean, put up a big windmill. You walk out your door. You'll see those big monsters churning. But even that they don't want to do. I don't think they want to do anything. I think they want to close your businesses. But just remember, Second Amendment. They're going to take it away. As sure as you're sitting or standing. They're going to take it away from you. The Second Amendment. Don't let it happen.
Pennsylvania lost more than one in three manufacturing jobs after NAFTA and China's entry into the WTO. And that was a vote and courtesy of Sleepy Joe. Biden looked American labor into the eyes and took their dues, their union endorsements and their votes. The unions, I mean the unions have to be more reasonable. They have to be more reasonable. And we love the unions. We love non-union. We love—I've had it all, ya know. I built every building I built in New York was with unions and unions are fine. A lot of Republicans don't want me to say that, but I'll tell you, unions are fine. Tell them to keep their dues down, please. But they're fine. And you have unions here. You have non-unions. What I talk about is the worker. They treated our workers horribly. We lost our jobs to foreign lands. Our workers got fired, whether they were in the unions or not. Then he sold out, and he passed the Cadillac tax. You know what that is, on union healthcare plans? Attack their energy jobs, and sent their factories to China. And now he's back begging for their votes. And you know, people—it's like a custom, Democrats.
We shipped hundreds of millions of masks, gloves and gowns to our front-line healthcare workers. To protect our nation's seniors we rushed supplies, testing kits and personal … to nursing homes, we gave everything you can possibly give and we're still giving it because we're taking care of our senior citizens. [applause]
Joe Biden recently raised his hand on the debate stage and promised, here give away -- he was going to give it away, your healthcare dollars to illegal immigrants, which is going to bring healthmassive number of immigrants into our country. Massive numbers will pour into our country in order to get all of the goodies that they want to get, education, healthcare, everything.
We will continue to reduce taxes and regulations at levels not seen before. We will create 10 million jobs in the next ten months, and it will be higher than that. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, and surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. We will ban deadly sanctuary cities and ensure that federal healthcare is protected for American citizens, not for illegal aliens.
He's going to massively raise your taxes, reimpose crippling federal regulations, destroy your Social Security, and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. He's gonna destroy that and decimate your 401(k)s and retirement savings and stocks. Your stocks are gonna go down like you never saw anything go down before. He'll obliterate your Second Amendment. He'll give you- And he would, he would give free- He wants to give free healthcare to illegal aliens. That'll bankrupt Medicare. He wants to give- You saw him raise his hand. Remember the debate where they're all standing there and he looked around, "Who's going to give free healthcare to illegal aliens?" And everyone's raising hands. He's going, "Oh, oh." No, take a look. I'm not kidding. It's sad. It's pathetic.
Biden would terminate this comeback and put your families in great danger. He would reimpose the federal regulations, destroy your Social Security, destroy protec— And you know, he's, he's looking at doing all of this stuff. He will destroy protections for preexisting conditions and decimate your 401(k)s, your retirement system, your stocks, he'll establish a national sanctuary city policy for criminal illegal aliens. He wants to cut your vet facilities in half, go to socialized healthcare and end 180 million Americans' private healthcare plans, which they love. Biden pledges to oppose school choice, and he stated that if elected, charter schools are gone. And charter schools have been great. [booing]
We have a, a super V, not just a V because you look at what's happening with the numbers. They're very good, beyond good. Next year is gonna be a great year, or whether we allow Sleepy Joe Biden to impose a four-trillion-dollar tax hike, abolish American energy, shut down the economy, destroy the suburbs, he's gonna destroy the suburbs, low-income housing going all over the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens, and demolish our God-given rights.
The Biden agenda would collapse our economy and destroy your country. He'd destroy your Social Security and protections for pre-existing conditions, drain your Medicare by giving away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, eliminate private health insurance for 180 million Americans that absolutely love it. They love what they have with their health insurance. And his running mate sponsored the socialist healthcare takeover that would ban private insurance. So all of those 180 million people would lose their private healthcare, their private insurance.
We'll end surprise medical building, require price transparency. That's a big deal. That's probably bigger than healthcare. It's already signed, it goes into effect on January 1st, and further reduce health insurance premium, and very importantly, the cost of prescription drugs. I just signed favored nations clauses, meaning we have to have the lowest prices. They have to be comparable to the lowest prices in the world. Right now, they are many times higher, which is ridiculous.
Sleepy Joe Biden wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike, ban American energy, destroy the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. How about that one? And you know the bad part about that? You know, we all, we all have heart. We wanna take care of people. Problem with that is, everybody's gonna come to the United States. People that weren't even thinking about it, they're gonna say, "Oh man, these idiots are giving free healthcare, free college education. They're giving free everything. They're giving a Rolls Royce to every family that enters through the southern border."
And I wanna tell you, if you go back a few months before this pandemic, we were gaining, gaining, gaining. We had an insurmountable lead on China. I always heard they were gonna catch us by 2019 for 10 years. We were so far beyond, we were doing much better than they were. The Biden agenda would obliterate our economy. He'd destroy Social Security, destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. That's what he's going to do, drain your Medicare by giving away your healthcare to illegal immigrants. He would end our travel bans on jihadist regions and increase refugee admissions by, listen to this, over 700%. And this is the manifesto with Bernie Sanders, with Crazy Bernie. He made this deal with Crazy Bernie. And by the way, a lot of the Crazy Bernie voters last time, four years ago, voted for Trump because of trade, because they understand, the one thing they do understand, they've been— that our country's been ripped off for years.
On November 3rd, Florida will decide whether we end the pandemic and return to record prosperity, or whether we allow Joe Biden to kill the recovery, delay the vaccine, impose a four trillion dollar tax hike, ban American energy, which he wants to do, destroy the suburbs. He's gonna destroy the suburbs. Give free healthcare to illegal aliens, which means millions and millions of people are gonna pour into our country—[booing]—and indoctrinate your children with poisonous anti-American lies in their class, in their school room. [booing]
Joe Biden opposed the mission to take out Osama bin Laden. He opposed killing Soleimani. He voted for the Iraq War. He backed the disastrous Iran Nuclear Deal. And he cheered for the rise of China as a positive development for our country. I don't think so. [booing] That was a disaster. Now Biden has put forward the most dangerous and extreme platform of any major party nominee in history. The bad news is he doesn't even know what the hell it is. [laughter] The Biden plan would destroy Social Security and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. It will drain your Medicare by giving free healthcare to illegal immigrants that will come over to this country by the millions when they see this. End virtually all immigration enforcement and impose totally open borders. He would terminate our travel bans on jihadist regions. Remember I got that approved? They kept saying, "Oh, he lost. He lost. He lost." And then I won in the Supreme Court. We have a travel ban. Guess what?
We will create a national clemency project to right wrongful prosecutions and to pardon individuals—[cheers and applause]—who have reformed their life. You saw Alice, right? We love Alice. She had another 24 years to go. Can you believe it? She served 22 years, she had another 24 years to go. It was ridiculous. And she's a great woman. Create a ladder of opportunity for African American children by delivering school choice to every parent in America. So important. [cheers and applause] Give Black churches the ability to compete for federal resources for their communities. [cheers and applause] Bring better and tailored healthcare to address the historic disparities that we've had for so many years. You know that. This includes investing in treatments for kidney disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, sickle cell disease—
They will impose total open borders so that people can pour into our country, and they will give them free healthcare, free welfare, and the right to vote in your elections. You won't ever win—[booing]—another election as a Republican. They even want to take down the wall. The wall, I won on the wall too. We won on a lot of things. "Take down the wall," I heard him say it the other day. "We will take down the wall." You know, we have the strongest border we've ever had now. We're almost finished with the wall. [applause] Strongest border, right, Sonny? And we built it despite—it's incredible, the effect it's having. We built it despite, rather, rather, everybody said no chance. I mean, we had a whole very powerful Democrat party oppose me. And yesterday, I don't know if you saw it, the Court just ruled that the money I took was taken legally. So at least we have a legal wall. [applause] The Appeals Court. So, we took it, and we built the wall and we'll be finished with it very soon, but it's had a tremendous impact on illegal immigrants coming into the country. And by the way, we want people to come into our country, you see that by the vote I got, but we want people to come in legally and through merit. Through merit, where they can help us. [applause] The radical Democrats will implement nationwide catch and release. You know that is? You catch a killer, you catch a rapist, and you say, "Oh, thank you very much. Please give us your name. Oh, come back in three years. We're going to put you on trial. Oh, Good." [booing] You never see them by the way. Remember I had that debate with Joe Biden? He said, "No, they come back." Yeah, they don't come back. They don't come back. No. They don't come back. Like, never. Maybe 1%, but I doubt it. That's the end of 'em. You let them loose in our country. I got rid of it. You think that was easy?
They want to rip down buildings and rebuild them with no windows. I like windows, I like big, beautiful windows. He wants to do a total government takeover of healthcare that will destroy your doctor's offices and rural hospitals. So, if you are sick, if you have a cold go to a hospital, wait online for about three days, and hope you get a decent doctor. Ossoff also supports a crippling nationwide lockdown. He wants you to lock your home nice and tight after you're inside of it, and he passes legislation to let hardened criminals go free, get them out of jail, get them out of jail. Ossoff will be a complete tool for the radical left donors who are trying to buy Georgia Senate seats. Do you see the money these people have raised? I mean it's, it's, really, uh, very, uh, well, of course I just raised $250 million, and I should say. I didn't raise it, it just came. I said, how are we doing on that front? Because, you know, we didn't get great publicity, boy were they—they were so happy these guys [pointing to media]. You might not be happy in a few weeks, you know, you might not. [applause] No, they were so happy. I said, "How's fundraising going?" They said, "Sir, about 250 million." I said, "250 million what?" "Dollars." How the hell did that happen? Because people believe in what we're doing, that's why. They believe in what we're doing. [applause] But that's why Ossoff's donations come from Silicon Valley, San Francisco and the other liberal places, and they don't come from Georgia. This is not your fau—I know you. You're with me, I'm with you, we've always had wins from primaries to two elections. We won two elections, believe it or not. I think I won the second one by more than I won the first one, I do, right? [applause] Bill, I won the second one by more.
And the people that understand those values are Kelly and David. They understand those values. And, you're with our law enforcement, right? A hundred percent. I don't have to ask her that. They'll allow heroin, cocaine, fentanyl, and other deadly drugs to flood across our borders again and poison our youth. They'll take away your healthcare. They'll eliminate private insurance. We have 180 million people that love their private insurance. You can forget about it. And you'll lose your doctor. Remember President Obama said, "You can keep your doctor. You can keep your plan." Guess what? He said it 28 times. That was a lie. That was a lie. That turned out to be a big, great scam lie. And remember, I got rid of the individual mandate, the most unpopular thing in Obamacare, [cheers] fighting a lot of different fronts, which really doesn't make it Obamacare anymore, by the way.
David's opponent, Jon Ossoff is an unhinged radical leftist. He's not a Senator. He's not a Senator. That's, that's not a Senator. Ossoff said that he's very proud to be endorsed by socialist crazy Bernie Sanders. He's weak on China. He promoted Chinese propaganda, and then he failed to disclose his business ties to the Chinese communist party. Other than that, he's a wonderful guy, right? Ossoff supports the largest tax hike in American history. If they get in, Warnock and Ossoff, if they get in, you're gonna have the largest tax increase that you've ever had. It'll be the largest tax increase in the history of our country. For what? The Green New Deal. Let's rip down a building because its windows are too big. Let's build a building with no windows. Among many other things. He supports the insane Green New Deal, which would crush middle-class parents trying to raise a family. He will support the socialist takeover of American healthcare, which will lead to rationing poverty and death. Ossoff also backed the radical left-wing crusade to defund police. The last summer, he proudly joined the anti-police mob, he didn't like the police. He doesn't like our police. We love our police. [cheers and applause] Slandering our brave men and women in blue. If you vote for Jon Ossoff, he will attack our heroes. He will destroy our economy, and he will betray you and your family. And it'll happen very quickly. That's why you must vote. And really importantly, get out tomorrow. Vote for David Perdue. He's a great gentleman. He loves you.
O'Reilly: Can Americans in 2017 expect a new healthcare plan rolled out by the Trump administration, this year?

I'm honored to be here today with many of your tremendous modern-day leaders. We're joined tonight -- and I want you to give him a nice hand, because he's on our side -- got to take care of our people, right? (Applause.) And he's got a lot of power for the people of Kentucky. Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell -- where is he? (Applause.) Come here, Mitch. Thank you, Mitch. How you doing, Mitch? Hey, Mitch, are we going to be okay? Everything good? That healthcare is looking good? Good. Thanks, Mitch.

I mentioned that the other day to a group in my office. We're going to be doing some trade deals as soon as we get the healthcare finished. Oh, I'm looking forward to these trade deals. They're the ones -- ooh. There's going to be no ambiguity. But I used the word "reciprocal." You know, Harley Davidson makes great motorcycles. They were in my office. They were in my office. And they came in -- I said, how you doing? "Great." How's business? "Great." How do you overseas? "Well, it's tough. We have some countries that charge us a $100 [sic] import tax." I said, 100? 100 percent. Think of it. They want $100 [sic] -- 100 percent. So I said, how do you do? "Not so well. It's tough."

And it's important to realize how we got to Obamacare in the first place. Back in 2009 or 2010, House and Senate Democrats forced through a 2,700-page healthcare bill that no one read and no one understood. By the way, today it's thousands of pages more. It's not even understandable. They ignored the public, they ignored the voters, and they jammed a massive failed healthcare takeover right through Congress.

And remember, we're going to negotiate, and it's going to go to the Senate and back and forth. The end result is going to be wonderful and it's going to work great. Once this is done, we are also going to work on bringing down the cost of medicine by having a fair and competitive bidding process. (Applause.) Some people think that's just as important as healthcare.

We have some crazy, arcane laws, folks, just in case you haven't heard. I am confident that if we empower the American people, we will accomplish incredible things for our country, not just on healthcare but all across our government. And, by the way, that Second Amendment is very, very safe right now. (Applause.) I promised. I said we're going to save the Second Amendment. I promise you we are going to save the Second Amendment. It's very, very safe. We would not be in good shape if a certain other person won this election, I could tell you. You would not be happy. And if they came to make a speech, 250 people would have showed up.

But we also got rid of the individual mandate from Obamacare which basically guts out Obamacare. That will be next. That will be next. That's where you pay a lot of money for the privilege of not getting healthcare. OK. How do you like that one? How that one made it through court, I will made it through twice.
It's gone. And, you know, that was where you had to pay a lot of money for the privilege of not having to pay for bad health care. Okay? One of the truly rip-offs, that was a big rip-off, but we got rid of it. So all you people, how many people were you paying for not to have it? Lot of people, right? Yeah, lot of people. Lot people, they paid not to have health care. That doesn't work. We are allowing businesses to join forces to buy better health care for less money through association health plans. They just came out two weeks ago and they cross state lines. We're allowed to cross state lines. You're going to get very low prices for very good healthcare. [applause]
And then, we get on to tax reductions, which I like. The House legislation does so much for you. It gives the States Medicaid flexibility. And some of the States will take over their healthcare. Governor Rick Scott in Florida said, just send me the money—they run a great plan. We have States that are doing great. It gives great flexibility.

I'm honored to be here today with many of your tremendous modern-day leaders. We're joined tonight -- and I want you to give him a nice hand, because he's on our side -- got to take care of our people, right? (Applause.) And he's got a lot of power for the people of Kentucky. Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell -- where is he? (Applause.) Come here, Mitch. Thank you, Mitch. How you doing, Mitch? Hey, Mitch, are we going to be okay? Everything good? That healthcare is looking good? Good. Thanks, Mitch.

I mentioned that the other day to a group in my office. We're going to be doing some trade deals as soon as we get the healthcare finished. Oh, I'm looking forward to these trade deals. They're the ones -- ooh. There's going to be no ambiguity. But I used the word "reciprocal." You know, Harley Davidson makes great motorcycles. They were in my office. They were in my office. And they came in -- I said, how you doing? "Great." How's business? "Great." How do you overseas? "Well, it's tough. We have some countries that charge us a $100 [sic] import tax." I said, 100? 100 percent. Think of it. They want $100 [sic] -- 100 percent. So I said, how do you do? "Not so well. It's tough."

And it's important to realize how we got to Obamacare in the first place. Back in 2009 or 2010, House and Senate Democrats forced through a 2,700-page healthcare bill that no one read and no one understood. By the way, today it's thousands of pages more. It's not even understandable. They ignored the public, they ignored the voters, and they jammed a massive failed healthcare takeover right through Congress.

And remember, we're going to negotiate, and it's going to go to the Senate and back and forth. The end result is going to be wonderful and it's going to work great. Once this is done, we are also going to work on bringing down the cost of medicine by having a fair and competitive bidding process. (Applause.) Some people think that's just as important as healthcare.

We have some crazy, arcane laws, folks, just in case you haven't heard. I am confident that if we empower the American people, we will accomplish incredible things for our country, not just on healthcare but all across our government. And, by the way, that Second Amendment is very, very safe right now. (Applause.) I promised. I said we're going to save the Second Amendment. I promise you we are going to save the Second Amendment. It's very, very safe. We would not be in good shape if a certain other person won this election, I could tell you. You would not be happy. And if they came to make a speech, 250 people would have showed up.

I just want what's right. And I think, for the most part, they want what's right too. So we'll see what happens but I do believe we have the votes for health care at the appropriate time. And I think we're going to have the votes for taxes and I will say the fact that healthcare is so difficult, I think, makes the taxes easier. The republicans want to get it done and it's a tremendous tax cut. I mean, especially for the middle class and especially for business.

He did it with healthcare too, he said "This is for the rich, this is for the rich you're not going to get your coverage." Everybody is going to go into hospitals; that's going to be terrible, the world is coming to an end, OK.

And regulations down to a level that nobody's ever seen. I mean nobody's done anything near what we've done. We've actually had a lot of legislation pass. A lot of people say, oh, gee, you have to get the taxes – you have to get the healthcare. They're two very biggies, but we have – we've passed legislation that I think more than almost any, out of the four to nine month period, more than any other president, they said Harry Truman –

Four billion. That's in Missouri. We're making healthcare more affordable and accessible. We're keeping down the costs of the--you know, I call it the remnants--the remnants, because getting rid of the individual mandate is--was a great thing. I mean, how many people are helped by that? That was the most unpopular--most unpopular thing in Obamacare, where you had the privilege of paying a fortune for not having to pay a fortune to have healthcare.
And you know what? That doesn't work. So you're paying a lot of money for not having to pay for bad healthcare. That doesn't really work. We got rid of it. You know how many businesses--how many businesses were helped by that? No more individual mandate. The worst thing in Obamacare.
They want to take over American healthcare, and destroy it. [booing]
Joe also voted no on repealing and replacing Obamacare, which we almost had done, but I'll be nice now. We couldn't get a single Democrat vote. If we did, we would have killed it, and we would have had great healthcare.
But we're giving you a lot of great healthcare anyway. If you look at the plans we're coming out with, they're great. And we got rid of the individual mandate, the worst part of Obama. [applause]
O'Reilly: Can Americans in 2017 expect a new healthcare plan rolled out by the Trump administration, this year?

And then, we get on to tax reductions, which I like. The House legislation does so much for you. It gives the States Medicaid flexibility. And some of the States will take over their healthcare. Governor Rick Scott in Florida said, just send me the money—they run a great plan. We have States that are doing great. It gives great flexibility.

I'm honored to be here today with many of your tremendous modern-day leaders. We're joined tonight -- and I want you to give him a nice hand, because he's on our side -- got to take care of our people, right? (Applause.) And he's got a lot of power for the people of Kentucky. Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell -- where is he? (Applause.) Come here, Mitch. Thank you, Mitch. How you doing, Mitch? Hey, Mitch, are we going to be okay? Everything good? That healthcare is looking good? Good. Thanks, Mitch.

I mentioned that the other day to a group in my office. We're going to be doing some trade deals as soon as we get the healthcare finished. Oh, I'm looking forward to these trade deals. They're the ones -- ooh. There's going to be no ambiguity. But I used the word "reciprocal." You know, Harley Davidson makes great motorcycles. They were in my office. They were in my office. And they came in -- I said, how you doing? "Great." How's business? "Great." How do you overseas? "Well, it's tough. We have some countries that charge us a $100 [sic] import tax." I said, 100? 100 percent. Think of it. They want $100 [sic] -- 100 percent. So I said, how do you do? "Not so well. It's tough."

And it's important to realize how we got to Obamacare in the first place. Back in 2009 or 2010, House and Senate Democrats forced through a 2,700-page healthcare bill that no one read and no one understood. By the way, today it's thousands of pages more. It's not even understandable. They ignored the public, they ignored the voters, and they jammed a massive failed healthcare takeover right through Congress.

And remember, we're going to negotiate, and it's going to go to the Senate and back and forth. The end result is going to be wonderful and it's going to work great. Once this is done, we are also going to work on bringing down the cost of medicine by having a fair and competitive bidding process. (Applause.) Some people think that's just as important as healthcare.

We have some crazy, arcane laws, folks, just in case you haven't heard. I am confident that if we empower the American people, we will accomplish incredible things for our country, not just on healthcare but all across our government. And, by the way, that Second Amendment is very, very safe right now. (Applause.) I promised. I said we're going to save the Second Amendment. I promise you we are going to save the Second Amendment. It's very, very safe. We would not be in good shape if a certain other person won this election, I could tell you. You would not be happy. And if they came to make a speech, 250 people would have showed up.

Administrator Verma. And thanks to all the women that came today. It's great to see so many strong, professional women that are on the frontlines of healthcare. So thanks again for coming today.

The President. For them, at some point very soon, I think we're doing very well on health care. It's been very much miss reported that we failed with health care. We haven't failed, we're negotiating and we continue to negotiate and we will save perhaps nine hundred billion dollars. You know if you look at, if you look at the kind of numbers that we're talking about, that's all going back into the taxes. We have to do healthcare first to pick up additional money so that we get great tax reform. So, we're going to have a phenomenal tax reform. But, I have to do healthcare first. I want to do it first, to really do it right. Health care has been going along you know it's a negotiation so I do. And it's just a negotiation. And it's going to take a little while longer but as you probably hear in Congress is coming along with some great people at congress. They want it to happen. We will have no Democrats. Zero. That means we have to get close to a hundred percent of the Republicans. Not an easy way to run a government. You saw that with Justice Gossage which is we're very proud of but he had no almost no democrat support even though he was central casting like the perfect Supreme Court Judge. So, we'll see what happens. I think we're doing very well with health care which surprises us like breaking news but they all know it they just don't tend to write it and after that we're going to start on tax reform and infrastructure.

The President. I think tax reform will be easier but it's going to be tough. You have a lot of people out there that what you know they have their own agendas including a lot of supporters of different people that are in Congress. They have their own agendas. They want certain things. Tax reform is going to be tough but it won't be as tough as healthcare. Healthcare is very very difficult. You look at that. Look at Hilary Clinton, that failed. And you look at so many of the others. Obamacare failed. Obamacare was just, you know, they just in the end just gave up just to get the vote. You look at what they had to do in Nebraska where they essentially gave it away for Nebraska to get that final vote

The President. Many many of the and this is going to be much worse year than last year for Obamacare. So Obamacare is a disaster. It's really gone, essentially it's gone. If Obamacare isn't bailed out almost on a monthly basis, it fails. It immediately fails. We have a great health care plan that I think will happen and if it happens then I go immediately to tax reform and that will happen. That will be easier than healthcare.

The President. Well you know, I put a deadline on health care and the fake news immediately went crazy because when I didn't make the deadline don't forget I said withdraw I didn't even say take a vote I say withdraw. Well that same thing is being negotiated and great points are being won and lost. The great points are being won that are going to lower premiums and make our health care incredible. But by putting a deadline they say "Trump didn't make it he didn't make it." So I don't want to put deadlines. Health care is going to happen at some point. Now, if it doesn't happen fast enough I'll start the taxes. But the tax reform and the tax cuts are better if I can do healthcare first

The House of Representatives has done its job. It sent a plan to the Senate, and the Senate is working it over. We spent a lot of time yesterday with Mitch McConnell and a lot of the great Senators. They happen to be Republicans because we're having no help—it's only obstruction—from the Democrats. The Democrats are destroying health care in this country. We have had no help. We will get no votes no matter what we do. If we gave you the greatest plan in the history of the world, you would have no Democratic vote. It's all going to be Republicans or bust. And the Republicans are working very, very hard on getting a great healthcare plan.

But we're going to expand tax-free health savings accounts—the HSAs—to increase healthcare coverage, getting Washington out of the way and giving more control and funding back to the States, stabilizing exchanges so that those preexisting conditions are protected.

For Democrats, this vote is a chance to make up for the terrible harm they have inflicted on Americans like those who are with us today. Obamacare has been for them a nightmare. There is still time to do the right thing. And for Senate Republicans, this is their chance to keep their promise. Over and over again, they said repeal and replace, repeal and replace, but they can now keep their promise to the American people to provide emergency relief to those in desperate need of help and to improve healthcare for all Americans.

I just want what's right. And I think, for the most part, they want what's right too. So we'll see what happens but I do believe we have the votes for health care at the appropriate time. And I think we're going to have the votes for taxes and I will say the fact that healthcare is so difficult, I think, makes the taxes easier. The republicans want to get it done and it's a tremendous tax cut. I mean, especially for the middle class and especially for business.

He did it with healthcare too, he said "This is for the rich, this is for the rich you're not going to get your coverage." Everybody is going to go into hospitals; that's going to be terrible, the world is coming to an end, OK.

And regulations down to a level that nobody's ever seen. I mean nobody's done anything near what we've done. We've actually had a lot of legislation pass. A lot of people say, oh, gee, you have to get the taxes – you have to get the healthcare. They're two very biggies, but we have – we've passed legislation that I think more than almost any, out of the four to nine month period, more than any other president, they said Harry Truman –

But we also got rid of the individual mandate from Obamacare which basically guts out Obamacare. That will be next. That will be next. That's where you pay a lot of money for the privilege of not getting healthcare. OK. How do you like that one? How that one made it through court, I will made it through twice.
Secretary of Labor R. Alexander Acosta. Mr. President, thank you. And so, you know, the story that you shared with us is a story we've heard from so many Americans. There are 11 million Americans and their families that work for small businesses that can no longer afford healthcare. And that's a big, big problem. Right?

It's gone. And, you know, that was where you had to pay a lot of money for the privilege of not having to pay for bad health care. Okay? One of the truly rip-offs, that was a big rip-off, but we got rid of it. So all you people, how many people were you paying for not to have it? Lot of people, right? Yeah, lot of people. Lot people, they paid not to have health care. That doesn't work. We are allowing businesses to join forces to buy better health care for less money through association health plans. They just came out two weeks ago and they cross state lines. We're allowed to cross state lines. You're going to get very low prices for very good healthcare. [applause]
Four billion. That's in Missouri. We're making healthcare more affordable and accessible. We're keeping down the costs of the--you know, I call it the remnants--the remnants, because getting rid of the individual mandate is--was a great thing. I mean, how many people are helped by that? That was the most unpopular--most unpopular thing in Obamacare, where you had the privilege of paying a fortune for not having to pay a fortune to have healthcare.
And you know what? That doesn't work. So you're paying a lot of money for not having to pay for bad healthcare. That doesn't really work. We got rid of it. You know how many businesses--how many businesses were helped by that? No more individual mandate. The worst thing in Obamacare.
They want to take over American healthcare, and destroy it. [booing]
Joe also voted no on repealing and replacing Obamacare, which we almost had done, but I'll be nice now. We couldn't get a single Democrat vote. If we did, we would have killed it, and we would have had great healthcare.
But we're giving you a lot of great healthcare anyway. If you look at the plans we're coming out with, they're great. And we got rid of the individual mandate, the worst part of Obama. [applause]
A majority of House Democrats have already sponsored a socialist takeover of healthcare. The Democrats' plan would eviscerate Medicare and eliminate Medicare Advantage for 20 million seniors. [audience boos]
Democrats are also fighting to give welfare and free healthcare to illegal aliens paid for by you, the American taxpayer. Thank you very much. [audience boos]
She's doing great. If Democrats gain power, they'll also be planning a takeover of American healthcare and that would be socialism, what they want to do. The Democrat plan would obliterate Medicare and eliminate Medicare Advantage for more than 121,000 West Virginia seniors who depend on it. Republicans will protect Medicare for our great seniors who earned it, and by the way, who paid for it. Right? You paid for it. [applause]
I heard him talk about telling the truth. He was talking about you have to tell the truth. And yet 28 times he said you can keep your doctor if you like your doctor. You can keep your plan if you like your plan. They were all lies. Over and over again you heard that. Just used it to pass a terrible healthcare plan that we are decimating strike by strike. You saw what happened to the individual mandate, the most unpopular part. And we actually had Obamacare killed except for one Republican vote and any Democrat--one Democrat and we would have had it obliterated and you would have had great healthcare. But we're doing a lot to make it a lot better until we do get rid of it.
Democrats' plan to destroy healthcare, also includes rating Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. I'm sure you don't mind that. As we speak, Democrats are openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to violate our laws and to over run our borders.
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
That's such an important thing. They've been trying to pass that for decades. I got it done. After years of surging premiums, the cost of healthcare is finally coming down. We're getting the cost of healthcare down. And last month, I proudly signed the largest bill to fight the opioid epidemic. It's the largest bill in American history. [applause]
They'll end up taking away your healthcare. You know what's going on with that. It's such a disaster. You'll end up tripling your tax. Your tax is going to go through the roof, and it still won't pay for it. They basically want to impose socialism in the United States. They want to. . . [booing] . . .  they want to erase your borders. Your socialism hasn't done very well for Venezuela. Would you say that's not too good?
We do not have proper staffing at our facilities. Veterans face long wait times. They can't see the doctors. Many are forced to go out of state to receive their healthcare. That is unacceptable. I'm tired of the politics and the excuses that have plagued the V.A. for years now. It absolutely has to stop. [applause]
If Democrats get the majority, one of their first projects will be a socialist takeover of American healthcare—you've been seeing it—meaning taxes like you've never seen before. The Democrat plan would obliterate Medicare and eliminate Medicare Advantage for more than 40,000 Montana seniors. You know, the Montana seniors are a lot of them here—incredible people. They depend on it. It would be obliterated.
Democrats' plan to destroy healthcare also includes raiding Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants.  [booing] 
The Democrat Party—not the Democratic Party, but the Democrat Party wants to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education. . . [booing] . . .  and what do they really want? The right to vote, because they figure that's the way they stay in office forever. Remember that. That's a big move.
They'll take away your healthcare and they'll make it impossible. They'll impose socialism on the state of Florida. [booing] 
Andrew Gillum has laid out criteria what he would ban. The fact is, he would ban the vast majority of handguns and long guns in the state of Florida. He is hostile to the 2nd Amendment. He will not protect your rights, and he cannot be trusted to be the governor. I'll also protect - - protect your right to pursue the type of healthcare you want. Andrew Gillum supports Bernie Sanders' government run Medicare-for-all.  [booing] 
And it sounds - - it sounds nice at first but then you read the fine print. It abolishes Medicare for seniors. Medicare Advantage gone. If you get insurance through your job, the government will take it away from you. You'll get dumped on a government run single payer plan. In fact, everybody with health insurance would lose it and get pushed on the single payer except the VA and the Indian Health Service. So I guess that means that Elizabeth Warren has a 1/1000 percent chance of keeping healthcare.  [applause]
If Democrats gain power on Tuesday, one of their very first projects will be a socialist take-over of the American healthcare system; you can't have it. They'll destroy what we're building and what we're going to build. The Democrat plan would obliterate Medicare and eliminate Medicare Advantage for nearly 2 million Florida seniors who depend on it. The Democrat plan is especially unfair to Hispanic-Americans. One out of every two Hispanic seniors is enrolled in Medicare Advantage. Republicans will protect Medicare for your great, great seniors that we love who earned it and who, by the way, paid for it.  [applause]
Always. Democrats' plan to destroy healthcare also includes raiding Medicare to fund illegal immigrants. That's what they want to do. As we speak, Democrats are openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to break our laws, violate our sovereignty, overrun our borders and destroy our nation in so many ways, and we can't let it happen.
They want to sign up the illegal immigrants for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and guess what they really want? They want them voting because they believe they'll be voting for Democrats every single time. The Democrats only believe in defending the borders of other countries. They don't believe in defending our country. Open borders, "come on in." means crime. That's what it means.  [booing] 
If crying Chuck Schumer, Nancy Pelosi, and...and a legendary Maxine Waters…gained a majority, they will try to raise your taxes, restore job killing regulations, shutdown your coal mines and your steel mills. That's what's going to happen. Take away your healthcare. Your healthcare, you could forget it. You're going to live in a socialist world, and put illegal aliens before American citizens. The people of Ohio are not too happy. Not too happy. [booing]
THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mike. He's a good man. I just say that's a good man who loves you and he's going to take good care. If Democrats gained power on Tuesday, one of their very first projects will be a socialist takeover of American healthcare. You know that. [booing]
Democrats plan to destroy healthcare, also includes raiding Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. How do you like that Ohio? [booing]
Does Ohio like that? I don't think so. We know the people of Ohio too well. As we speak, Democrats are open encouraging millions of illegal aliens to violate our law and break into our country, and they want to sign them up for free welfare, free healthcare, free education, and, of course, the right to vote, the right to vote! [booing]
THE PRESIDENT: We have just introduced new affordable healthcare plans that are really incredible, lower priced than this horrible Obamacare, which we really have decimated and kept your premiums down by doing it, and we got rid of the individual mandate that costs nearly 60 percent. [applause]
The worst part of Obamacare, and we're working very hard. We're going to be the ones that solve the healthcare. We have already come close to doing it.
He co-sponsored legislation that provides late term abortion on demand. You know that. He backed a total government takeover of healthcare and he even sponsored legislation to provide free taxpayer funded healthcare to illegal aliens. Which I'm sure you love paying for that. [booing]
Democrats will also destroy your healthcare by inviting millions upon millions of aliens to violate our borders. Once they arrive, they want to sign them up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. [booing]
And thanks to the extraordinary service of our military in Afghanistan—19 years we're in Afghanistan [booing]—we may now be able to seek a political resolution that, frankly, they've wanted to talk about for a long time. We've hit 'em very hard, but it's been 19 years. Think of that, 19 years. We spend more on military in Afghanistan, $50 billion a year, than most countries spend on their entire country, healthcare, education, everything. We spend more than they do.
The Democrats have to now decide whether they will continue defrauding the public with ridiculous bullshit...[cheers and applause] ...partisan investigations. Or wayther [sic] they will apologize to the American people and join us to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, bring down the cost of healthcare and prescription drugs which we are doing incredibly, help us fix our broken trade deals which are coming along really well. We have our team right now in China. They just arrived. China. China. We've gone up, they've gone down but we want them to be healthy. We want them to be happy and healthy. China. And by the way we are building the wall as you -- , we are building that wall. Building – [cheers and applause] We are building that wall!
We eliminated the Obamacare individual mandate penalty. [cheers and applause] The most unpopular part, and we are going to hopefully in the court -- in Texas you heard we won the case, now it has to be appealed and then we will go to the United States Supreme Court. We have a chance of killing Obamacare. We almost did it, but somebody unfortunately surprised us with thumbs down but we will do it a different way. You know what, we will do it a different way. But we got rid of the individual mandate where you were forced to pay a lot of money for the privilege of not having to buy bad healthcare. Okay? Not too good. So, we are going to get rid of Obamacare.
And I said it the other day, the Republican Party will become the party of great healthcare. It's good. It's important. [cheers and applause] And we've created new options to help Americans purchase affordable health plans all across state lines. You now have options you would have never had. The Democrats are pushing socialist government-run healthcare that bans private healthcare for 180 million Americans. [booing] Now think of it. A lot of you have private plans and they're great.
Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
OCASIO-CORTEZ: Well, I'm encouraged by the fact that he is now against the Hyde amendment. I think that that's where -- I think it's a very base level where all candidates need to be. I'm excited to be introducing a repeal of the Hyde amendment via amendment -- we'll see where it goes -- for incarcerated women and the -- the maternal and reproductive healthcare of incarcerated women is -- it should be guaranteed as it is with all women in the United States. And so I think it really depends -- and that's really what the Hyde amendment is about.
The Hyde amendment isn't about abortion per se. The Hyde amendment is -- is truly about equality of health care and health care access for low-income women and women of color and women that get caught in our -- in our mass incarceration system. And so the Hyde amendment is -- is about income inequality and it's about women's healthcare in a system of income inequality. So I think that we need to repeal it. I think that -- that having that -- a strong record, I think all of this is stuff for voters to decide. But I think that we really -- this is not in the niche topic of women's issues anymore, this is an American issue.
On that day, 44,000 veterans came to us to ask for greater choice in their healthcare on day one. And we began to open up that aperture and provide them, for the first time, with urgent care across the country. So they now have what their fellow citizens have had for many years.

So I want to thank the President and the administration for supporting this new measure and all of his pro-small-business policies. We very much appreciate it in the small-business community. So this new rule really allows small businesses to offer a benefit to our employees that will help our employees with healthcare costs, provide more and better options for them and also for employers.
More than 120 Democrats in Congress have also signed up to support crazy Bernie Sanders' socialist government takeover of healthcare. [Booing.]
I've done more in 2-1/2 years than any President in the history of this country. And when you look at the things … I'm going to give you a list. Nobody's approved what we've approved; nobody's gotten through. Whether it's the Vets and Choice, and accountability. Both two things you could never get approved. They could never get them approved. You look at the tax cuts, you look at ANWR. You look at the individual mandate. I've had a lot to do with healthcare. You look at right-to-try. Add right-to-try with the individual mandate.
THE PRESIDENT: You had to pay not to pay for insurance — to pay a fortune for the privilege of not paying. One of the most unpopular part. We'll get great healthcare after — if we win back the House. And keep the Senate. Keep the presidency.
THE PRESIDENT: So we're rebuilding the military, which is creating jobs. We're doing some really good things in health care. We're doing some tremendous things in health care. You see what's happening with some of the policies that we're coming out with. We got rid of, as I said, we got rid of the individual mandate, which was by far the most popular thing in Obamacare. We're managing Obamacare much better. But Obamacare is a very — it's very bad. And if we win, I will do healthcare. If we get the House. If we get back the House — you can't do it without the House.
If we get the House, we get the Senate, we get the presidency, we will have a great health care plan, we will have tremendous healthcare. But we're doing a good job on that anyway. Doing a very good job.
We have a healthcare plan that's far better than Obamacare. I'm keeping Obamacare alive because I felt I should have—I should do that. We had a chance to terminate it, and a gentleman voted against it after campaigning for many years to repeal and replace, but he voted against repeal and replace. Someday, somebody will explain that to me—[laughter]—but that's what happened. Because we just about had it done.

THE PRESIDENT:  Nearly half of all the homeless people living in the streets in America happen to live in the state of California. What they are doing to our beautiful California is a disgrace to our country. It’s a shame.  The world is looking at it. Look at Los Angeles, with the tents and the horrible, horrible, disgusting conditions. Look at San Francisco. Look at some of your other cities, and then you have a Governor  . . .  You have a Governor that invites the whole world to come into California. “We’ll pay for your healthcare.  We’ll pay for. . . ”
And then you wonder why so many people are coming up. They’re coming up because we’re the hottest economic country in the world, but they’re also coming up because you have people like that Governor say, “Come on up. We’ll give you healthcare. Come.” Who wouldn’t come up? Who wouldn’t come up? How crazy is this? How crazy is this? Schools, healthcare.
Democrats have never been farther outside the mainstream. Liberal politicians want to eliminate private healthcare and force everyone onto the government plan. Remember the lies from the previous Administration. If you like your plan, you can keep your plan. If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor. Twenty-eight time, one lie after another. Twenty-eight times it was said, and it turned out to be a total lie. [booing]
Every major Democrat running for President supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would raid Medicare and destroy the private health insurance plans of millions of American families that they love. [booing] My administration is defending your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. [cheers and applause]
So, we got rid of the individual mandate, which was the most unpopular part of Obamacare. And we’re running it better. You know, I had a political decision. Do I make it great? Alex Azar our secretary, do we run it well and sort of say, “Hey, we run it well.” Or do we run it badly and have everybody upset?” We said, “We gotta run it well,” but it’s still much too expensive. It’s lousy healthcare. But we got rid of the worst part of it. Individual mandate. Individual mandate, where you have the privilege of buying the right not to have to pay for expensive insurance that’s no-good health insurance. And we won’t--and you gotta remember this--Republicans, and I speak for every one of them, we will always protect pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] We’re going to protect, always. Right? Got to do it.
And as you know, Democrats even want to give free healthcare to illegal immigrants. [booing] As long as I'm your president I will never, ever let Democrats take away your healthcare, and give it away free to people that have entered our country illegally. We can't do that. It's a tremendous incentive to come in. Democrats also want to bring in unlimited numbers of foreign refugees from overseas, all at the expense of supporting their own communities. Republicans, no matter what you do, where you are, we want people to obey our laws. You want people that are going to help our country.
The Democrat party has never been farther outside of the mainstream. Every major Democrat running for president supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would raid Medicare, force private doctors out of medicine, and lead to the rationing of life-saving treatments. And, you know, they're gonna take away your private healthcare, your private insurance, 180 million people will lose with what they want to do. It's a disaster. You know, it's like, did you ever really sort of feel where you don't even have to treat people nicely? You don't have any choice, you have to vote for me. I can leave right now. I can say, "North Carolina, I've had it with you. I'm leaving right now." And you know what? You got to go out and vote. What are you going to do? Put one of these crazy people running our country again?
My administration is defending your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. Remember President Obama? Twenty-eight times, remember 28 times, they counted them, and there's much more than that, I would imagine, that you can choose your plan, you can choose your doctor. It didn't work out that way, did it? Obamacare, and we're keeping Obamacare alive. We got rid of the individual mandate, the worst part of Obamacare. [cheering] We're keeping it and running it as well as it can, but the premiums are too high, the deductibles are through the roof, it's ridiculous. And we're coming up with Lindsey Graham and all of the folks, we're coming up with a great healthcare plan that if we take back to the house. That's why Dan and Greg, if we take back the House, if we keep the Senate, and maybe even increase it a little bit, wouldn't be bad, and on the assumption we keep the presidency, you're going to have great healthcare.
Incredible, the strides that we've made. We will defeat the Democrat effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, and education by liberating Americans from their endless push for a job-killing, soul-crushing Washington regulations. As an example, we're trying to get the car companies, gonna give them a little bit of extra energy, and they'll be able to build a car that consumers can buy, which will be better than the car they make today.
Every major Democrat running for president supports a massive government takeover of healthcare that would destroy Medicare as we know it today. My administration will protect Medicare and defend your right to choose the plan and the doctor that is best for you. [cheers and applause] And we will always protect patients with preexisting conditions. The Republicans will always do that. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 50 years. You don't hear this because the fake news doesn't wanna write about it. [booing]
The AIDS epidemic in this country will be gone within 10 years. We've already started the process. It's been funded. It's been funded. Who would've thought that? Honestly, when I ran, I didn't know that. We have now the technology and what they've done with respect to AIDS is incredible. What a terrible, terrible period of time the world went through, but we will have it ended within 10 years. We will defeat the effort to drive up the cost of houses, cars, healthcare, light bulbs. Right? They took away our light bulb. I want an incandescent light. I want to look better, okay?
The United States wants to announce today an additional tranche of $118 million to aid the Venezuelan crisis response. The assistance will include $36 million for relief efforts inside of Venezuela. They'll provide urgently needed medicines that improve access to quality healthcare of for the Venezuelan people. The remaining monies will protect and assist many of your countries, as you generously host a combined 4.4 million Venezuelans who have fled their country, over 10 percent of the Venezuelan population. We'll help provide food, shelter, clean water, and legal support for them.

He promised to stand with our veterans and give our veterans access to the real-time world-class healthcare that you earned, we reformed the VA, and Veterans Choice is now available for every veteran. [cheers and applause] And this president promised to secure our border, we made historic investments in border security. Apprehensions on our Southern border are already down by 60%. And we've already started to build that wall on the Southern border of the United States. We're doing it.
Think of it, a President of the United States who's made our economy, with a lot of help from all of you, frankly, but from Mike and from some of our great senators and some of our great people that we have with us, we made this the strongest economy in our history. We've rebuilt our military. We're taking care of healthcare like nobody's been able to do. What we've done is incredible. And by the way, we're protecting your Second Amendment. If you don't have me, your Second Amendment is gone. [cheers and applause]
My administration is also fighting the Democrat socialist healthcare agenda that would obliterate Medicare. Republicans will protect Medicare, and we will always protect patients with preexisting conditions. [cheers and applause] And for those of you that have private healthcare, health insurance, 180 million people, they are going to end it, obliterate it, and most people are thrilled with it. We are going to leave it. You're gonna have your plan the way you want it. And there's no plan like those plans.
The President. Thank you, fellas very much, appreciated. Okay, you got to do it tomorrow, let's go get a runoff and one of these two guys are fantastic. Let's vote tomorrow for the entire Republican ticket, just vote. We're also delighted to be joined by two really good friends of mine. These are warriors, these are warriors. Different types of people, but equally, I mean, they fight for you and they love this state, and they love this country. One, hears a strange name when I first heard. He called me up, "Sir," they said, "there's a man named John Kennedy on the phone." I said, "Who?" "He's running for the Senate in a state that likes you a lot." I said, "Where?" "Louisiana." [cheers and applause] And I said, "Let me check it out." And it was true, there was a man named John Kennedy, a very successful guy, a brilliant guy. You're not going to know what this means because I'm a big, like student, I like academics, believe it or not. People don't know. My uncle was a professor for 35 years or something at M.I.T. I like that stuff. He went to Oxford. Oxford's like, as good as it gets. And he was a great student at Oxford, you know he puts on that country stuff all the time, but I want to tell you. And we know the country smarter than the other guys anyway. But–so John Kennedy goes it, "I'd love to have your support. I'd really love it if I could." But I said, "John, to me, you're the real John Kennedy, you're the real deal," and we came down. It was–I'll never forget, it was a Friday night, and it was this massive airplane hangar someplace. I don't know where the hell I–all I know is in your great state. And we had thousands and thousands of people show up. And I looked at him and I liked him, and I looked at that crowd, I said, "You know what? I think you're going to win tomorrow." The election was on a Saturday and John Kennedy won by a lot. It was a great thing and a great thing for our country. Where is John Kennedy? John, come here, come here, come here John. And then, we have another guy. Any time I talk about healthcare. Anytime, I want to know anything about medical, anytime I want to know anything about taking care of people, I call a man named Bill Cassidy. He's incredible. What a heart, what a heart. Come on up here, John. Come here, John. Oxford. [applause]
In a recent Democratic debate, every single Democrat Presidential candidate raised their hand, in favor of giving free government healthcare, to illegal aliens. [booing] And then, you wonder why they come to America? Why wouldn't they come? Free healthcare, free education, free everything. And I jokingly said one time–and everybody then gets a Rolls-Royce. And the fake news said, "President Trump, lied. He said that the illegal immigrants all get a Rolls-Royce." They don't have a lot of sense of humor. That's the problem with this press, what a bunch of dopes. Free Rolls-Royce. "The President told a lie. They don't get a Rolls-Royce." I'm only kidding about the Rolls-Royce. I just don't want to have a story. You know, I have a bad story. I did it again. I promised the Rolls. I–I was just kidding.
We've taken swift action to lower the price of health care for working families with new options that cost up to 60% less than failed Obamacare. And we got rid of the individual mandate in Obamacare, the most–the most unpopular unfair thing. That's why you pay a fortune, for the privilege of not having to pay a fortune, for your healthcare. So, you're paying not to have to pay, it's terrible. Anyway, I got rid of it. It's a big deal. That's a big deal. That was not easy. Our ambitious campaign to reduce the price of prescription drugs has produced the largest decline in drug prices in more than 50 years. You see that. And we're bringing them down much lower and we're even going to give our states. You know, the drug industry has it pretty well wired. Drugs are very expensive. Outside, in other countries, you can buy the exact same drug for 50%, 60, 70% less than you pay. Same drug, same factory, same company. So, it's not like it's different. I just gave Ron DeSantis, governor of Florida, and I'm giving other governors the right to go to Canada and other states and other countries, other countries. To buy the drugs, because they pay much less. We can cut our prices by 50, 60, 70% in some cases. So, we're giving states the rights to go to other countries and make a deal on drugs. It's easier than going through this horrible system where the Democrats refuse to allow you to do anything to cut the price of drugs. They don't want to let you do it. To help patients with life threatening conditions, we passed–I love it–right to try. So, if you're terminally ill, if you're very sick, we have the best doctors and labs, technicians in the world. They have so many different things, but it will be four, five, six years. You couldn't get it. You know why? You're terminally ill, and they tell them we don't want to make you sick. You're terminally ill, you're going to be around for four weeks. And they say, "We can't give you this drug because it may hurt you." For 50 years, they have been trying to get it. Not that easy. You'll not going to get it pretty quickly.
But if Democrats seize power, they would throw the floodgates wide open, wide open. We would have people coming into our country, look at what's going on in California, and the people of California don't want it, they say, "Come into California. We'll give you free healthcare, free education." Why wouldn't ... I may even move to California if they keep going. No, but all it does is it brings everybody in. What's wrong with these people? We're rebuilding our military stronger than ever before and we are not going to deplete it again on stupid, senseless, endless wars. [cheers and applause] We've invested more than two and a half trillion dollars restoring our armed forces and all of it was built in the USA—[cheers and applause]—and that includes approving the construction of almost 200 F-35 fighters, stealth, stealth. And many of them are built right here, right here. You know that, right? In Fort Worth. [cheers and applause] As we restore our security, we're also restoring our prosperity. America is winning again and America is respected again. [cheers and applause] And by the way, I have to say this, so outside they have close to 30,000 people. And I wonder if I could ask the Fire Marshal, fill up this little area, let them in, it would be so nice. You know they have a certain max, we broke the record tonight. [cheers and applause] Good place.
Every single Democrat candidate for president raised their hand in favor of giving free healthcare to all illegal aliens. [booing] They wanna give more to illegal aliens than they give to American citizens. You see that. As president, I will never allow the Democrats to take away your healthcare dollars and give them to people that are in our country illegally. Can't do it. [cheers and applause]
In fact, I just signed an executive action to protect American healthcare benefits for all American citizens. Among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are millions of legal immigrants right here in Texas, including millions of patriotic, hardworking Mexican-Americans who play by the rules, pay their taxes, follow our laws, and strengthen our communities. [cheers and applause] Whether you are a first-generation or tenth-generation, and every American citizen, and you do, you've been treated so badly. But you're not being treated badly anymore. You know? We got rid of the individual mandate from crazy Obamacare. [cheers and applause] Every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, your borders, and is always loyal to you for a change. We're loyal to you. [cheers and applause]
While we're fighting for shared priorities, the American people, the Democrat Party has never been farther outside of the mainstream. They've gone nuts. Every Democrat running for president is pushing a healthcare agenda that would utterly eviscerate Medicare. My administration will always protect Medicare for our beloved seniors. And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause]
But Stacey Abrams wants to give illegal aliens the right to vote. Do you believe this? [booing] I mean, some of these people, they wanna give them education. They wanna give them this. They wanna give them free healthcare. They wanna give these people, that come into our country illegally ...
The Democrat party has never been more extreme, you know that, than it is today. The Democrat healthcare agenda would obliterate Medicare. I will always protect Medicare for our seniors, and we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. Always. We'll always take care of them. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
Democrats are becoming more extreme and militant by the day. The Democrats' planned government takeover of healthcare would obliterate Medicare. What are they doing? I will always protect Medicare for our nation's seniors. It's going to be protected. What they're doing is crazy. [cheers and applause] And we will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. [cheers and applause] And we will also protect you with pre-existing physicians. How about that? Pre-existing physicians. First time I've ever said that, just thought of that. True. Because under their plan, you don't get your own doctor. You know what you get? Whatever the hell you get. That's what you get. "Oh great, doc, fix me up doc. You mean you wanna work on my heart? Who are you, doc?" I don't think so.
Edwards is totally owned by the Liberal trial lawyers, who are causing your state insurance rates and car insurance to skyrocket through the roof. Perhaps, most disturbing, Edwards has allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of dollars and healthcare from hardworking Louisiana citizens. [booing] He cares more about illegal aliens than he cares about Louisiana citizens. I'll tell what, I love our military, Eddie loves our military. [applause] They care more about illegal aliens than taking care of our vets and taking care of our military. Edwards is dangerously soft on crime, you know that.
If you want to show your love and support for American law enforcement and just plain success of your state and your country, then vote early for Eddie Rispone. Democrats are becoming more extreme by the day. The Democrats plan government takeover of healthcare would demolish your Medicare. I will always protect Medicare for our nation's seniors. We will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions, and we will also protect patients with pre-existing physicians. [applause]
But everything that we have achieved is under threat from the left-wing ideology that demands absolute conformity, relentless regulation, and a top-down control of the entire U.S economy. Far-left politicians in our Nation's Capital want a massive Government takeover of healthcare; they want to give government bureaucrats domination over every aspect of your business and your life; they want to eliminate American oil and natural gas; they want to enlist us in global projects designed to redistribute American wealth and kill American jobs all over our Nation. Washington's Democrats and their radical agenda of socialism would demolish our economy, reinstate the avalanche of regulations that I have already ended, decimate the middle class, and totally bankrupt our Nation. As long as I'm President, America will never be a socialist country.
But just to finish up, he's in the pocket of the trial lawyers who have sent your car insurance rate to the highest level anywhere in the United States. [booing] It's crazy. He allowed illegal aliens to steal millions of healthcare dollars from hardworking Louisiana families, and John Bel Edwards supports illegal aliens, not American citizens. It's pretty, it's pretty simple. [booing]
Sanctuary cities have adopted a policy now of lawless anarchy aimed at innocent civilians. They deliberately release dangerous criminals onto our streets out of our jails. It's crazy, republicans believe our cities should be sanctuaries for law abiding Americans not for criminal aliens [applause]. In the Democrat Presidential debate, every single Democrat candidate raised their hand and pledged to give illegal aliens free healthcare, courtesy of you, the American taxpayer. [booing]
And it wouldn't be much different in the State of Pennsylvania, that I can tell you. But you know, somebody that believes in that is Sleepy Joe Biden. He was caught telling a far-left radical activist that he would shut down fossil fuel production in Pennsylvania. You saw that. But the voters of this Commonwealth will never, ever let that happen. [applause] Can you imagine a guy coming in, whether it's him or anybody else? They all want to do it. He just raises his hand--he has no clue what he's doing. They raise their hand. Remember he looked? Do you want to give illegal aliens healthcare, even though we're taking it away from our own soldiers that are up--and he looks and they're all raising their hand? Did you see that? Well, he, "Oh, oh, oh, okay, I'll do it too."
Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, illegal crossings are down 75% since May and the wall is going up at a very rapid pace. [applause] The radical Democrats have gotten more and more extreme. And that's why they did this impeachment hoax, because Nancy Pelosi had absolutely no control. She knew what was going to happen. She knew. The radical left has taken over the Democrat party. Democrats are pushing for a socialist takeover of healthcare that would strip you of the doctor and coverage of your choice. We have 180 million people with private healthcare that love it. They're going to take it away from you. I don't think so.
And by the way, this is for a hundred years. I'm not just talking about this little point in time. The Republicans are known as, it's always harder to stick together. These people are great. We have a great Republican Party, and we have to get that change. We have to take back the house. You'll have the greatest healthcare ever if we take--and by the way, we had another victory. The individual mandate, just a little while ago, it came over the wires, it was just upheld. The individual mandate is now gone. The most unpopular part of Obamacare. [applause] It was just upheld.
So, we want to take back the House, we'll hold the Senate, and we'll keep the White House. You will have the greatest healthcare. You will continue with the greatest judges. You know, we have judges that are--we just had a great story in the Wall Street Journal. I have to tell, I have to be always very truthful, because if I'm a little bit off, they call me a liar. They'll say, "He gets a Pinocchio," the stupid Washington Post, they have Pinocchio. I mean, even if you're like saying things perfectly, it's a Pinocchio. There's nothing you can say where you don't get a Pinocchio. But what happens, what happens is we have Wall Street Journal the other day got the best story. They said, "Whether you like him or not, the job he's done on judges and Supreme Court Justices, but the job he's done on judges is amazing. Say it's the most important thing. See, I don't agree. I say defense is the most, the military is the most. But once you're beyond the military, I mean to me defense is the most important. Because without good defense, maybe we don't need judges so much, right? It's like somebody said, "Well, we violated the budget." I said, "Do me a favor, don't worry about the budget. If we're attacked and aren't doing very well and somebody says, 'Well, at least we have a good budget,' that doesn't work too well." Right? That doesn't work. So, we have great military, we have great judges, we have great everything.
Carolyn Maloney, give that money back. Every penny should come back. They act so pompous. They act so righteous. They're not righteous. They're not righteous. They're bad people. The far-left Democrats have never been more extreme than they are now. Democrats are pushing a socialist takeover of healthcare that will take away your coverage and take away your doctor. 180 million people are going to lose. A lot of people here now have healthcare finally under us that's phenomenal. And that's what you want. They want to take it away, 180. They want you to go to a hospital ward someplace and sit there all night. I don't think so. Not in this group. And you know what? Some people, it's good some people, but can you imagine? They want to take away 180 million people, great, private, highly negotiated healthcare where you have your own doctor. Remember Obama? 28 times, 28 times, "You can have your doctor, you can have your plan." Didn't work out that way, did it? I think we should impeach him for that. Let's impeach him, for that, for the IRS scandal, for the guns. Remember the guns, he was giving them to anybody that wanted them. He gave guns to the worst people in the world and then they didn't have them registered, right? Not to good. Impeach him. Why didn't the Republicans impeach him? Those were really, how about giving around $1.8 billion in cash? How about that? [booing]
If they have something that they're pretty sure is gonna work but is going to take another six years, I brought those times way back, by the way, way down, but they would travel to Asia, they would travel to Europe, they would travel all over the world to try and get a cure, because we wouldn't sell them the medicine because we didn't want to take a chance on making the people sick. I said, "Wait a minute, they're gonna die. They're going to die." "Well, sir, we can't take the liability." I said, "Then we'll draw up a statement assessing all liability, taking all liability away from the country, away from the insurance companies, away from the healthcare companies, away from the doctors." [cheers and applause]
But the Democrats are pushing a socialist takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private insurance plans and massively raise taxes on the middle class. A lot of you have private insurance plans that you love. They're gonna take them away from you. But see, I don't like doing this too soon. I did it with Pocahontas, I came up with this great name. I came up with a lot of different stuff. I said she was a total fraud and everybody believed me and she went down. Then she started coming up and then she went down. It doesn't help me to do it a year and a half before the election. That's why, like with the Green New Deal, okay? I wanna say great things about it. Okay? I don't wanna knock it and then they say, "Oh, we're not gonna use that." I like it when they say, "No longer can you fly airplanes. No longer can you have any cows in the pasture. Right? No longer can we do anything." We can't do anything anymore. No, the Green New Deal, I love it. I think it's great. It should be debated. It should be debated.
Bernie Sanders' healthcare plan would cost over 32 trillion dollars a year. That's more money than we make in five years. That's more money than we'll ever make. He is indeed crazy. No, no, he's ... Oh, let me take that back. No, it's a great plan that we have to consider strongly. [laughter] We have to consider his plan strongly. Now see, I'll tell you what the fake news will do. They'll take my last words, "It's a great plan. We have to consider it strongly." They'll cut everything out in the front and they'll say, "Donald Trump is in favor of Bernie Sanders' Green New Deal." [booing] They can do more with a tape than they can do with a newspaper. No, they'll do that. You'll see it. Somewhere you'll see it, "Trump supports his plan." They are sick.
But taking their cues from socialist Bernie Sanders, AOC, all these people. Liberal lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private health insurance. Many of you have great insurance. Republicans will never let that happen. They'll probably change their mind before the— See, this is why I don't like talking about it now. I'd rather wait six, seven, eight months, let them say it 5, 000 times when they have to do it, and then talk. I'm talkin too early about it. I shouldn't even be here tonight, but I love the people of Wisconsin. [cheers and applause]
And I'm also very proud to report that we won a critical Supreme Court victory yesterday on immigration. [cheers and applause] We will now be finally able to enforce federal law, and ensure that those seeking admission to our country are able to support themselves financially and not abuse taxpayer-funded programs. [cheers and applause] They were killing our country, killing our country. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. Frankly, they're crazy. These people are crazy. They're taking their cues from socialists like Bernie. Left-wing lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private healthcare plans, which many people like. [booing] The plans of every Democrat running for President would demolish the economy of New Jersey, where half a million new New Jersey workers are employed at some of the best and most innovative healthcare employment companies. We have them working at the companies, and we have people getting great healthcare. It's been so long. It's finally working and they wanna destroy it.
The Republican party will never let it happen. We are saving your healthcare while the Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare, take away your doctors, take away all of the good care that we fought, and we fought hard, and we're doing well and now we're doing better. And by the way, some time prior to the end of the year, we're putting in for a new middle income tax cut, a very big one. [cheers and applause] But we're making healthcare better and much, much cheaper. We've done a great job in running it and we've given you a lot of alternatives. We are protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will, the Republican party, pre-existing conditions, we saved it. We are stopping surprise medical billing and making everything transparent. That's a big deal—[cheers and applause]—and that will take effect starting in about two months from now. Everything's transparent. You'll be able to see pricing. You'll be able to go and price other hospitals, other doctors. It's gonna be an incredible thing. Nobody believes I was able to do it, but we did it. [cheers and applause]
We are protecting Medicare for our nation's seniors. Democrats want, and you know this, Democrats wanna raid Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. [booing] And you know, we all have a heart. We all have a heart, but when you tell people to come into our country, like this clown governor of California, come into our country, come. They're all gonna come. If they think they're going to get free education, free healthcare, they're all gonna come. If you don't say it, they're not gonna come. Because who would even think this?
As I told a rally of veterans today at Council Bluffs, thanks to President Trump's leadership, we're finally giving our veterans access to the real-time world-class healthcare that you earned in the uniform of the United States. Veterans' Choice is now available for every veteran in America. [cheers and applause] Thank you.
The Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders' government healthcare takeover bill. It's a takeover of your healthcare that would strip all of those 180 million great Americans of your private coverage. You don't want that. You got great deals. You're able to negotiate, you're able to keep your doctor, keep your area, keep your hospitals, keep everything that you wanted. Now they wanna take it away. Report to an operating room when you have a cold, okay? In your local hospital. I don't think so. One hundred and eighty million people, but I'm not gonna knock it because I want Bernie to bring it right up to the end and we'll debate it the day before the election. Okay? [cheers and applause] We are saving your healthcare while socialist Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare.
And Sleepy Joe has no idea what he's even talking-- He doesn't even know what he's talking about. He's so lost. Honestly, that poor guys is so lost. They talk healthcare. She said, "It's over for him." It was over for him, actually, if you knew him, a long time ago. Now it's really over.
We are making healthcare better and cheaper. We got rid of the individual mandate, the most unpopular thing—[cheers and applause]—which essentially killed Obamacare. We are protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will, the Republican party. [cheers and applause] We're stopping surprise medical billing and making everything totally transparent. And I signed it already. Everything now is going to transparencies, where hospitals, doctors, everybody has to tell you how much things are costing. Watch those prices come down. [cheers and applause] Right? Right?
I have an expert on healthcare. He said transparency because it's a big deal. It's a big deal. Nobody else would have gotten it done, that I can tell you. Transparency is bigger than healthcare because you will see prices tumbling like you wouldn't believe. People go in for a blood test, they get charged 2,700 dollars. Down the road they get the same test for 57 dollars. The same exact test. Maybe it's better. Maybe it's better. It's crazy. When you have transparency it's all gonna come, you watch. You watch. But this person, a real expert, said, "This is bigger than healthcare," and I got it done. Unfortunately it won't really start kicking in until after the election because it takes a period of time. They have certain statutory requirements, et cetera.
I had a choice, do we run it well or do we run it poorly? If we run it poorly everyone's gonna blame me. If we run it well everyone's gonna give him credit, especially the fakers back there, right? [laughter] But you know what? We gotta run it well but we're coming up with a healthcare that if we win the House we will have the best healthcare of any country in the world, by far. [cheers and applause]
We have transformed veterans' healthcare, including VA Choice. The best. You know, I think I'm a totally brilliant human being. I think I'm the smartest person, so, so I came up with a plan. I'll never forget, I was in New Hampshire, I came up with this idea because everybody kept coming up to me and saying, "Sir, it's really terrible what's happening with healthcare. We're waiting in line for two weeks, for four weeks, for seven weeks." Honestly, people were waiting in line, they weren't very sick, they were terminally ill, truthfully, before they saw a doctor. By the time they got to the doctor. So I came up with this incredible plan. Only I could think of this. I said, "Here's what you do. Here's what you do, if somebody can't get a doctor quickly," because we have great doctors at the VA. They don't get enough credit. "If you can't get to a doctor quickly you go outside, you go locally, you get a doctor, we pay the bill, you get yourself all better." Right?
And I know the people of Iowa don't care about this but we are making substantial investments in rural healthcare. We are combating the opioid epidemic. Drug overdose deaths have declined for the first time in nearly 31 years. That's a great thing. [cheers and applause] And our great First Lady is helping us with that. That is such a big thing for Melania. [cheers and applause] Big, big thing. She is really involved.
And we will never let the Democrats give away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, especially when we say, "Come in. Come in, we'll give you healthcare." You know, it's one thing they come in and it's a rough situation because we all have hearts but when people are saying, like in California this wacky governor, he says, "Come in, we're gonna give you healthcare. We're gonna give you free education. We're gonna give you everything. We're gonna give you a beautiful Rolls-Royce." See to show you how fake they are one of the newscasters said, "Donald Trump said that the governor of California promised a Rolls-Royce to illegal immigrants. He didn't promise them. This was a lie and a misrepresentation by President Trump." They can't take a little humor. They can't take it. These people are sick. They're sick. [booing] No. They're sick people.
And African American poverty numbers have hit the lowest rate ever recorded. Wages for African American workers have increased by $2,400 per year, also a record. And you know this. For decades, the Democrat party has betrayed African Americans. They betrayed us all. They betrayed all of us. But we're delivering for African Americans. We're delivering for Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans like nobody has ever done. We are fighting for great jobs, great schools, great healthcare, and a truly great future for our country and for them. We are the party of equal opportunity for all Americans. [applause]
Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They want to let anyone into our country from all around the world. Just come on in, folks, we're going to give you free healthcare. We're going to give you free education. [booing] We're going to give you more than our vets are getting. We're going to give you--every family will get a free Rolls Royce. You know I said that, Matt. I said that to them and some of the fake news picked it up and they said, "President Trump said every family coming into our country illegally gets a brand-new free Rolls Royce. He lied. He lied. He lied." They gave me a Pinocchio. They don't get it, Matt, do they, Matt? Actually, they get it better than we understand. They get it very well. They get it. They know what's happening. And the wall is being built. I will tell you the wall is being built. [applause] And you know they went after us on everybody knows the wall is going up. So, what's happening--you know, you do know who's paying for the wall, don't you? Right. Redemption from illegal aliens that are coming. The redemption money is paying for the wall. They're so sad to hear that because it's okay, finally, they go. You have to understand an entire party is fighting. They'll give me anything I want. Our military would rebuilt it. 2.2, it's really $2.5 trillion over a period of three years. They give me anything but not 10 cents for the wall. They said, "We like drones." Well, drones don't keep people out. Drones are wonderful. They fly around, take pictures. We're going to give you a drone. No good. So, we now have built over 100 miles of wall. [applause]
Remember this. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. Taking their cues from crazy Bernie, 132 congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover that would strip 180 million Americans of their very, very coveted private coverage. [booing] The Democrat party wants to run your healthcare, but they can't even run a caucus in Iowa. [applause] By the way, it's a week, a week. You know I turned on at seven o'clock. I wanted to see who won. They said, "There's a little problem." Little did they know? Does anybody—it's now a week—does anybody know who won Iowa? [pauses for crowd chatter] I don't know. Maybe Rand or Lindsey. Rand, does anybody know who won? Lindsey, you're a total pro. Nobody knows. He said nobody. Flip a coin. Flip a coin. Flip a coin. They're going to run your health care. Unbelievable. Nobody knows who won. Actually, I think they're trying to take it away from Bernie again. I think Bernie came in second. Can you believe it? They're doing it to you again, Bernie. They're doing it to you again.
We're saving your healthcare while the socialist Democrats are trying to take away your healthcare. We are making healthcare better and much, much cheaper. You've seen what we did. [applause] We are protecting people with preexisting conditions and we always will. The Republican party always will. Always will. And we got rid of the most unpopular thing in the healthcare world, the individual mandate. We had to pay a fortune not to have pay a fortune. You paid a fortune not to pay a fortune for bad healthcare. And we got rid of it, saved a lot of money for a lot of people. And we're stopping surprise medical bills and making everything transparent. That's bigger than healthcare transparency and that'll go unfortunately into effect right around the election time. It would be nice if we could get it earlier, but it's all done. It's all signed.
So finally, it's my great honor to introduce a tremendous person, a great fighter pilot. A lot of people don't know that. She's a great fighter pilot and a warrior Senate. She helped us so much during the impeachment hoax, she didn't wobble one bit, Martha McSally. [cheers and applause] You know, Martha's tough on the border. And she's working with me to strengthen our military still further, and lower your prescription drug prices, and we're making a lot of progress. But her opponent, I have to say this Martha, a guy named Mark Kelly. [booing] Even the Democrats don't like him much. He wants to raise your taxes, open your borders, give away free healthcare to illegal immigrants, and he wants to obliterate your Second Amendment. He wants to get rid of it. [booing]
Before I came into office, the far left's policy of open borders allowed deadly drugs to flow freely into our country, poisoning our children. Including, as you know very well right here in Arizona, Washington Democrats put the needs of illegal immigrants before the wellbeing of American citizens. They wanna let anyone from around the world simply walk across the border. And then they wanna give them a lifetime of free welfare, healthcare, everything. They wanna give them everything. [booing] For a long period of time, they were treated— And you know this, before I came, they were treated far better than our veterans were treated. Now our veterans are treated great. [cheers and applause] True.
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme, taking cues from Crazy Bernie Sanders. How's he doing tonight? [shouting] One hundred and thirty-two congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover of the world. Think of this, 180 million Americans are gonna lose healthcare coverage under this plan. But if you don't mind, I'm not gonna criticize it tonight. Let them keep going and I'll start talking about it about two weeks out from the election. Okay? Because I don't want him to change. Please don't change.
No, she— I did it too early. I would have saved it, but I guess it was effective. She's essentially gone-zo, so— One of those things. While the socialist Democrats are trying to destroy American healthcare and your social security, my administration is protecting your social security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. And that's what we're getting. [cheers and applause] That's right.
One of the big secrets. The Democrats won't let us say it. They wanna keep that as quiet as possible. Look what they gave you, the worst healthcare. And what we've done, we've gotten rid of things that nobody could believe that were so bad for you. Everybody was happy with defending your right to keep your doctor and plan of your choice. We're making healthcare better and much, much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the last five years before I took office, we are now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive than they were, and it's better healthcare. A lot of people don't know this. People don't know this. They think that's their issue. It's not. They failed on healthcare. We're protecting people with preexisting conditions, and we always will. And by the way, we're trying to get rid of Obamacare, but we're managing it incredibly, but we're trying to get rid so we can give you a great healthcare plan and protect preexisting conditions. Remember that. [cheers and applause] We're trying to get rid of it, but while we're having it, we're managing it really much better than they did. Remember they built the 5 billion dollar website? Remember that? It was supposed to cost 5 million dollars. It cost 5 billion dollars. Five billion.
I mean, you could get a kid out of high school. I have a son. He's a young boy, 13. He uses a computer. He could have given them a healthcare site. I would say he would have charged them 100 dollars, Barron Trump, and it would've worked. He's so good. "Hi dad. How you doing, dad? How's it going?" Bing, bing, bong. I said, "Don't play with that while you're talking to me." "Why, what's going on, dad?" These kids are incredible, right? The kids, they make us look like babies with that. But he could have given you a great site for about 2 dollars. They spent 5 billion dollars on a site that never worked. By the way, speaking of that, how did they do with their vote count in Iowa? [laughter]
So then we won Wisconsin, and then we won Michigan because those companies, now they're pouring back in. The auto companies are pouring back in, and Wisconsin's doing great with the farmers that Canada was taking. You know, Canada was charging our farmers 287% tariffs for dairy products. Okay? So what happens is this, we're working on healthcare. We're fighting to stop surprise medical billing. I just signed an executive order imposing price transparency because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very fast. We've approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the brand drugs, but they cost a tiny fraction. We've totally transformed veterans' healthcare, including getting long-sought VA Choice and VA Accountability, which they said could not be done. [cheers and applause]
Look, there was a dangerous thing that happened in 2016. It was the normalization of socialism by Bernie Sanders. [booing] The most dangerous thing was the normalization of socialism by Bernie Sanders, because what happened? Candidates started running as socialists. They embraced the platform. And today, there aren't shades of socialism. They are running to the left on a socialist platform. They wanna take our guns, they wanna take our healthcare, that's their platform. What they say they will do. Colorado, are we gonna let it happen?
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme, taking cues from Crazy Bernie Sanders, 132 Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie's healthcare takeover that would strip 180 million Americans of their great private coverage that you want. [booing] While the socialist Democrats are trying to destroy American healthcare, and trying to destroy your social security, that won't happen with me, my administration is protecting your social security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great, great healthcare, already done a good job. [cheers and applause] We're defending your right to keep the doctor, and to keep the plan of your choice. Remember, President Obama, 28 times, he said, "Keep your doctor. Keep your plan. Keep your doctor. Keep your plan. Keep your doctor. Keep your plan." Right? It was a lie. We should impeach him. We should impeach him. [cheers and applause] Impeach Obama. Get him out of office.
We're making healthcare better and much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the five years before I took office. We're now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive and they're better. They're better. [cheers and applause] We're protecting people with pre-existing conditions and we always will. We're fighting to stop surprise medical billing. I signed an executive order imposing price transparency. That's gonna be bigger than healthcare in a certain way. Watch the prices come down, because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very, very fast. We have approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the name-brand drugs, but at a tiny fraction of the cost.
He said, "It doesn't matter, you'll beat them all." [cheers and applause] I hope so. I hope so. So who is easier to beat, Crazy Bernie—[cheers and applause]—or Sleepy Joe? [cheers and applause] They think Bernie's easier to beat. [cheers and applause] They think Bernie's easier to beat. So whether it's Bernie Sanders's plan to eliminate private healthcare, Elizabeth Warren's plan—I told you that I had more Indian blood in me than her, even though I have none. I have none. Zero. I have none. I have none. I said I have more Indian blood in me than she has. And she choked. She said, "I'm gonna show, I'm gonna show ..." She hired this company and they went out and did a blood test. One thousand twenty-fourth, right? [laughter] So that means I probably won somewhere down the line a million years ago. [laughter]
Senator Scott is a leading—[cheers and applause]—superstar. [cheers and applause] He's a superstar. [cheers and applause] But he is a leader in lowering healthcare costs like nobody has done it. You know, people don't know, but in the last year, prescription drug prices came down for the first time in 51 years. [cheers and applause] And that was with no Democrat help. If we had the help, we could lower it by 50%. But we'll get their help. One of these days, they're gonna get smart. Senator Scott provides world-class care for our veterans. What he's done for our veterans is incredible. And bringing investment to distressed communities across our country through Opportunity Zones, including 135 right here in South Carolina. That's what it is. Tim Scott came to my office with an idea. He said, "Opportunity zone." I said, "Tim, what the hell is that?" What is it? Right, Tim?
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders's healthcare takeover. They wanna take away your healthcare. While the Washington Democrats are trying to destroy your healthcare and to destroy your Social Security, that's what's going to happen, my administration is protecting your Social Security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. [cheers and applause] And we are defending your right to keep the doctor and to keep your plan of choice. You remember when President Obama would say, "You can keep your doctor. You could keep your plan," 28 times. [shouting] He said, "You can keep your doctor and you can keep your plan." Well, he lied. [shouting] We should impeach him. [cheers and applause] We should impeach him for that. He lied 28 times. "You'll keep your doctor, keep your plan. It's wonderful. Great." Went through the roof. We're doing a great job.
We killed the individual mandate, which is the most unbelievable, horrible. [cheers and applause] And it's not really Obamacare anymore, but we're running the hulk of it and we're trying to kill it entirely, and then we will put it back. You'll have great healthcare, and preexisting conditions will be totally protected. Preexisting conditions will be totally protected. [cheers and applause] We're making healthcare better and much cheaper. While premiums more than doubled in the five years before I took office, we are now offering plans already that are up to 60% less expensive than the old Obamacare. Think of that and better. And better. [cheers and applause]
We are stopping surprise medical billing, a disgrace. And I signed an executive order imposing price transparency, because when providers are required to show their prices, which they don't have to do, but now they do, those same prices fall very, very fast. We have approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as the name-brand drugs, but at a tiny fraction of the cost. They're just as good. I always like a name brand. I mean, there's something. There's no difference. Probably sometimes they're better. We've totally transformed veterans' healthcare, getting long-sought VA Choice and VA Accountability passed after 50 years. [cheers and applause]
But they've embraced an extreme left-wing agenda. Their plans would massively raise your taxes, destroy our liberty, muzzle our faith, and erase our sovereignty. You know that. The Democrat party has gone crazy. Whether it's Bernie Sanders's plan to eliminate private healthcare, Elizabeth Pocahontas's plan ... By the way, she's history. She's history. I came up with that name far too early, I should've just waited. But it didn't matter. I thought she was making a come back. I said, "Wow, I just did it to her."
Washington Democrats have never been more extreme. One hundred and thirty-two Congressional Democrats have signed up for Bernie Sanders's healthcare takeover. While the Washington Democrats are trying to destroy your healthcare and your Social Security, and they are going to destroy your Social Security. Remember they used to say with me, "I'm gonna end it the first day." Well, you know what, we're gonna soon be four years and all I've done is make it stronger. You know that. My administration is protecting your Social Security, your Medicare, and is fighting to give you great healthcare. You're going to have great healthcare. We are defending your right to keep the doctor and to keep the plan of your choice.
Remember President Obama? "You can keep your doctor. You can keep your plan," 28 times. They said, "Impeach him. You should impeach him." Twenty-eight times he lied, 28 times he said that ... Twenty-eight times on record, "You can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan." Well, that's not true. It wasn't true. Impeach him. We're making healthcare better and much cheaper while premiums more than doubled in the last five years before I took office. We are now offering plans that are up to 60% less expensive and they're better plans. [cheers and applause] We are protecting people with preexisting conditions and we always will, and we are trying to terminate, in the Supreme Court of the United States, the worst healthcare in the world, and we are going to give you the best healthcare you've ever seen at a lower price and again, protecting preexisting conditions. Right? Protecting preexisting conditions.
I signed an executive order imposing price transparency, that's gonna be bigger than healthcare, because when providers are required to show their prices, those same prices fall very, very fast. Right? It's a big thing. That's a big thing. We've approved a record number of affordable new generic drugs, which are just as good as name-brand drugs, but a fraction of the cost. We've, we have given them, and there's a lot of political pressure not to do that, you can understand why.
In all our companies, if anybody who is out for this virus is getting paid for as long it takes, or anybody that has high risk we're all taking care of. So I'd focus first on that level. And then the second major thing is take care of the health care problem, because the healthcare problem will help generate the confidence.

I did want to just put on your radar screen the fact that I think if you look at cases by State, on a per capita basis, we're right at the top of the country—three or four. And of course, the healthcare infrastructure is designed to meet the population. And my fear, based on modeling I've received today, is that as early as 7 days, we can start to exceed our capacity to deliver health care. And even after surging, we may only get an additional 3 days. And so I'm asking for help in terms of surging our medical capacity.

The measure and all of those measures that we're putting in place will protect the health of all three nations and reduce the incentive for a mass global migration that would badly deplete the healthcare resources needed for our people. And so we are working very closely with Mexico, very, very closely with Canada. The relationship has never been better. We're all working for the same—toward the same goal.

But he's done a lot of things right. And he's been truly—I mean, he cares so much about healthcare. He cares so much about the cost of prescription drugs. He's been a fantastic Governor for Florida. They're very happy with him.

Mr. Connett. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President. We appreciate the opportunity to work with your administration on a lot of collaborative fronts. Number one, we've all talked about PPE products; that's critical. And it's not just to the hospitals—that's a must—but it's really to all healthcare providers out there working on the frontline. So our commitment is there to get it to the hotspots and get it to the care providers that are taking care of those patients. It's absolutely key.

We're profoundly grateful for their contribution to protect the lives and safety of our healthcare professionals. Cardinal has been working with us very well. FEMA and HHS formed a historic partnership with the private sector called Project Airbridge to bring supplies from other countries to the United States, including gloves, gowns, goggles, and masks. These supplies will soon be distributed around the country. We have large cargo planes coming in from various parts of the world.

From the moment this terrible virus reached our shores, each of you has worked relentlessly to get the vital supplies to our healthcare warriors. And they are warriors, aren't they? When you see them going into those hospitals and they're putting the stuff that you deliver. But they're wrapping themselves, and the doors are opening, and they're going through the doors, and they're not even ready to go through those doors. They probably shouldn't. But they can't get there fast enough.
We're also joined by three terrific Girl Scouts. We are also joined by three terrific Girl Scouts—Lauren, Sravya, and Laila of Girl Scout Troop 744 from Elkridge, Maryland—along with their troop leader, Megan Langley. Thank you very much. That's great. That's really great. These amazing 10-year-olds have donated 100 boxes of Girl Scout cookies to local firefighters, doctors, and nurses and have spent [sent]* approximately 200 personalized cards to healthcare workers all over. And they're going to do a lot more. Their ambition is to do a lot more.

Korea, I renegotiated the deal. I took a horrible deal. That was a Hillary Clinton special. That was a Hillary Clinton special. She said, "We have to make this deal with South Korea. It's going to mean 250,000 jobs." And she was right, for South Korea, 250,000. [shouting] And China's entry into the World Trade Organization was supported by Sleepy Joe Biden. That was one of the worst deals economically in the history of our country. When China joined the World Trade Organization, they became— They were flatline for decades. They became like a rocket ship. He voted for the war in Iraq. He voted for mass amnesty for illegal aliens. He supports sanctuary cities and now Biden wants to end immigration enforcement and require, he wants to require you to provide free healthcare for millions and millions of illegal aliens, okay? [booing]
And we want to see a continued activity of deregulation that we've seen—especially in the area of healthcare, through telemedicine, where a doctor doesn't have to be in the same room with the patient. We've seen that during the COVID era, and we want to continue that down the road.

Kids in school, jobs, and healthcare will be the theme of the proposal that we hope to come together and present to our Republicans. And then, as the Secretary of the Treasury indicated, obviously, you can't pass the bill in the Senate without the Democrats, and we'll begin to talk with them as well.

Additionally, my administration has secured 90 percent of the world's supply of the drug remdesivir, which is having great impact for the United States. And research continues daily on a lot of promising treatments, as I said. As we take these historic actions, we're joined today by Americans who've already benefited from the steps my administration has already taken to reduce the cost of healthcare and prescription drugs. We're going to have a big healthcare bill that we're going to be putting up very shortly, and it's going to be very complete.

It will destroy our country. We will go into a depression. We will put on regulation. We will double and triple taxes. We will—it will be terrible for health care. Just terrible. You'll have 180 million people lose their healthcare. It will be a terrible, terrible thing for our country.
He raised his hand and pledged to give free healthcare to illegal aliens, okay? A lot of you people, when you get–you don't get free healthcare, but he wants to give it. He wants to give lawyers, lawyers, free legal assistance to people that come into our country illegally, and his vice-presidential candidate, Biden picked Kamala, Kamala Harris. She's another, she's a beauty, who co-sponsored a $32 trillion socialist takeover of healthcare and our country, because our country would be ruined, destroyed. And the 33, think of this, you have 33 in healthcare and $93 trillion on the socialist Green New Deal, which doesn't work. It's like written by a child. It's written by a child, a foolish child. [applause]
To protect our families and workers during the China pandemic, I sealed our border against illegal immigration, and suspended the entry of foreign workers who threatened American jobs. And yet, if you're a farmer, a factory owner and you had people coming in from years, we made it easier for those people to keep coming in. I can't shut them off, you'd have to close up your businesses. Joe Biden, on the other hand, has pledged to allow virtually unlimited immigration during a global pandemic, spreading the virus, overwhelming our healthcare system, and displacing millions of American job seekers. The Biden plan would institute catch and release, I got rid of it, along the entire Southwest border. This is where you catch perhaps a murderer, perhaps a rapist. You catch somebody, you take their number, and you release them. You say, "Please show up to court in three years," nobody shows up. 1% show up. You know who the 1% are? The ones that aren't very smart. They're the ones that show up, they're the only ones that show up.
Joe Biden has pledged to abolish immigration enforcement, suspend all removals, provide free government healthcare, and, you know, they want to give it to illegal aliens. You don't get it. You don't get it. Restore, catch and release. Shield violent criminal aliens. This is what they want to do. And give every illegal alien on the planet earth a free ticket to invent an asylum claim and gain automatic admission into our country. We will have people coming into our country that never even thought of it before. You get free education, you get free healthcare, why wouldn't they come? Let's go to America. The Biden plan would unleash a flood of illegal immigration like the world has never seen. It's crazy. Biden's plan is the most radical, extreme, reckless, dangerous, and deadly immigration plan ever put forward by a major party candidate. It must be defeated, and it will be defeated on November 3rd. It will be defeated. [cheers and applause]
Give free healthcare to illegal aliens. You don't get free healthcare? Expand deadly sanctuary cities. Force taxpayers to subsidize late-term abortion. Shut down the energy fields of Pennsylvania. They want to shut them down. No fossil fuel. No fossil fuel. Texas isn't too happy, either. Go to Texas. I just left Texas a little while ago, two weeks. I said, they don't want energy, they don't want guns, and they don't want religion. A guy stands up, says, "Not going to win Texas!" But you have the same thing, because you do a big, you're a big fracking state. You want to see your taxes go up? Stop fracking. Doesn't hurt you at all, fracking. They want to throw up windmills that are going to ruin your houses. I mean, put up a big windmill. You walk out your door. You'll see those big monsters churning. But even that they don't want to do. I don't think they want to do anything. I think they want to close your businesses. But just remember, Second Amendment. They're going to take it away. As sure as you're sitting or standing. They're going to take it away from you. The Second Amendment. Don't let it happen.
Pennsylvania lost more than one in three manufacturing jobs after NAFTA and China's entry into the WTO. And that was a vote and courtesy of Sleepy Joe. Biden looked American labor into the eyes and took their dues, their union endorsements and their votes. The unions, I mean the unions have to be more reasonable. They have to be more reasonable. And we love the unions. We love non-union. We love—I've had it all, ya know. I built every building I built in New York was with unions and unions are fine. A lot of Republicans don't want me to say that, but I'll tell you, unions are fine. Tell them to keep their dues down, please. But they're fine. And you have unions here. You have non-unions. What I talk about is the worker. They treated our workers horribly. We lost our jobs to foreign lands. Our workers got fired, whether they were in the unions or not. Then he sold out, and he passed the Cadillac tax. You know what that is, on union healthcare plans? Attack their energy jobs, and sent their factories to China. And now he's back begging for their votes. And you know, people—it's like a custom, Democrats.
We shipped hundreds of millions of masks, gloves and gowns to our front-line healthcare workers. To protect our nation's seniors we rushed supplies, testing kits and personal … to nursing homes, we gave everything you can possibly give and we're still giving it because we're taking care of our senior citizens. [applause]
Joe Biden recently raised his hand on the debate stage and promised, here give away -- he was going to give it away, your healthcare dollars to illegal immigrants, which is going to bring healthmassive number of immigrants into our country. Massive numbers will pour into our country in order to get all of the goodies that they want to get, education, healthcare, everything.
We will continue to reduce taxes and regulations at levels not seen before. We will create 10 million jobs in the next ten months, and it will be higher than that. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, and surge federal prosecutors into high-crime communities. We will ban deadly sanctuary cities and ensure that federal healthcare is protected for American citizens, not for illegal aliens.
We will strike down terrorists who threaten our citizens. We will not let them threaten our citizens, and we will keep America out of endless foreign wars. We will end surprise medical billing. We don't want surprise medical billing. You know what happens. It's terrible, but we have ended it. And also, we've signed something that's incredible. You're gonna see. Some people say it's bigger than healthcare, and I signed it. Unfortunately it takes place on January 1st. You better elect me. [cheers and applause] You better elect me. [cheers and applause] It's called price transparency.
The President. I said to my people at the end of the day, "When is price transparency?" This is gonna lower your prices by 50%. You'll be able to negotiate. You'll be able to do things you're not even allowed to do now, with hospitals, with doctors. You get better doctors, you get lower prices. I said, "When does it start?" It's a complicated ... Oh, did I get, I was fought. You have no idea. Right, fellows? You were fought too. But they fought me on this price transparency. It's bigger than healthcare, could be bigger than healthcare. But I said, "When does it start?" They said, "Sir, we have it all set." "When?" "January 1st," "I said, I'd better win this election," because you're gonna see some unbelievable price reductions. And that includes on drugs, because we're reducing health insurance premiums massively, and the cost of prescription drugs went down the first time in 51 years, last year.
But in the other debates, he was giving them everything he wants, everything they want. Free healthcare for people that come into the country illegally, colleges, everything. Now the new deal, under the new deal, they get lawyers. If they come in to our country illegally, we supply them with legal advice. You believe it, lawyers? This is what we need, is more lawyers. [booing] This state lost 43% of all manufacturing jobs after the twin disasters of NAFTA and China's entrance into the World Trade Organization. That's courtesy of Biden and his friends. Earlier this year, I kept my promise to North Carolina when we ended the NAFTA nightmare and we signed the brand-new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement into law, it's been incredible. [cheers and applause] Everyone said, "Impossible." They all said it was impossible to get done, we got it done.
He wants to give illegal aliens government healthcare and taxpayer-funded lawyers, establish a national sanctuary city policy for illegal aliens with criminal records. You wouldn't believe. I mean, this stuff is not even really believable, but it is what it is. He wants to surge refugee admissions by 700% into our country, flooding your towns with poorly vetted migrants, including many from jihadist regions of the world. Biden opposes school choice, he opposes North Carolina opportunity scholarships, and he has stated that if he is elected, charter schools are gone. He said, "They're gone." And they've been incredible. [booing]
We will rapidly return to full employment, soaring wages, and record prosperity. We will hire more police, increase penalties for assaults on law enforcement, surge federal prosecutors into high crime communities, and ban all sanctuary cities. [cheers and applause] We will protect government benefits for American citizens, not for illegal aliens. What you're doing when you have all of these advantages, when you're giving them free healthcare, and free lawyers, and free college, and free everything, they all come. They didn't think of coming, but they see this, they talk and they talk to their friends and they all come in. They wanna come to America. You're just bringing people in and we don't wanna do that. We want people to come to our country, but they have to come in through merit and they have to come in legally, very simple. [cheers and applause]
He wants to force you to provide free government healthcare to illegal aliens. He will destroy your Social Security. He will destroy your protections for pre-existing conditions, and we will save Social Security. Remember they said last time, "Oh, Trump is gonna destroy social security." Well, it's now four years, we haven't touched it. We've protected it, and that's gonna remain that way. Biden opposes school choice and has stated that if he's elected, charter schools, so important, are gone. [booing] In a second term, I will provide school choice to every parent in America. [cheers and applause] A vote for Republicans is a vote for safe communities, great jobs, and a limitless future for all Americans. Instead of letting Washington change us, despite all that we have been through, we are changing Washington. [cheers and applause]
He's going to massively raise your taxes, reimpose crippling federal regulations, destroy your Social Security, and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. He's gonna destroy that and decimate your 401(k)s and retirement savings and stocks. Your stocks are gonna go down like you never saw anything go down before. He'll obliterate your Second Amendment. He'll give you- And he would, he would give free- He wants to give free healthcare to illegal aliens. That'll bankrupt Medicare. He wants to give- You saw him raise his hand. Remember the debate where they're all standing there and he looked around, "Who's going to give free healthcare to illegal aliens?" And everyone's raising hands. He's going, "Oh, oh." No, take a look. I'm not kidding. It's sad. It's pathetic.
Biden would terminate this comeback and put your families in great danger. He would reimpose the federal regulations, destroy your Social Security, destroy protec— And you know, he's, he's looking at doing all of this stuff. He will destroy protections for preexisting conditions and decimate your 401(k)s, your retirement system, your stocks, he'll establish a national sanctuary city policy for criminal illegal aliens. He wants to cut your vet facilities in half, go to socialized healthcare and end 180 million Americans' private healthcare plans, which they love. Biden pledges to oppose school choice, and he stated that if elected, charter schools are gone. And charter schools have been great. [booing]
Arellano. : But it was really hard to navigate the spectrum, to get services, to get any help whatsoever. It's a travesty what the government has done to veterans when they get out of the military. [cheers and applause] It's thanks to you and your laws and your leadership that allowed me to have choice when it came to healthcare. Not only for me, but for thousands of veterans in the state of Arizona. [cheers and applause]
STEPHANOPOULOS: Next question's on healthcare. It comes from Alycee Block. She's from Philadelphia, an assistant professor who voted for Hillary Clinton last time.

BLOCK: It is great, except I still have similar healthcare problems. It costs me -- with co-pays, I'm still paying almost $7,000 a year in addition to the co-pay.

But what we're doing is, we're going to be doing a healthcare plan – preexisting, protecting people with preexisting conditions -- as an example, yourself, it sounds like that's exactly perfect. That's exactly what we're talking about. We're going to be doing a healthcare plan very strongly and protect people with preexisting conditions.

THE PRESIDENT: So that we can do new healthcare.

STEPHANOPOULOS: But you've been promising a new healthcare plan.

We interviewed – I interviewed you in June of last year, you said the healthcare plan would come in two weeks. You could Chris Wallace that this summer it'd come in three weeks. You promised an executive order on preexisting...

You're going to have new healthcare, and the preexisting condition aspect of it will always be in my plan. And I've said that loud and clear...

THE PRESIDENT: George, it's been forty years since you had good healthcare – you've never really had good healthcare in this country. This country has never had it.

And Joe can say all he wants -- he's only doing it because he sees his poll numbers going down so substantially. But Joe can say all he wants about healthcare.

You know, Obamacare has been a failure from day one. It's too expensive, whether it's the premium or whether it's the cost generally. And they don't have their doctors, and they don't have their plans. We're going to have a very good healthcare. I think maybe a great healthcare for less money.

And the terms of the dosage: There will be—is it anticipated that no later than January, all the top priority people will have received the vaccine or be able to receive the vaccine. And so that kind of prioritization, which is the general prioritization done for all vaccines that are developed, particularly in a pandemic setting, goes to the high-risk people, the people with other underlying conditions, as well as first responders and people working directly in healthcare. And so that's going to be done very rapidly.

Through our historic relief programs, we saved more than one million Wisconsin jobs and 87,000 Wisconsin businesses, that's not too bad. [cheers and applause] And Biden would demolish all of those gains, and we've done similar things in other states. He would destroy your Social Security, totally destroy it, and destroy protections for preexisting conditions. They wanna go to social medicine, they wanna go to social— You know that, right? You do know that. They want social healthcare where you don't— Remember Obama, 28 times, "You can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan," that didn't work out too well, right? Why haven't they looked into that one, 28 times. Well, under Medicare for All, but it's basically socialized healthcare, you will never have your doctor, you will never have your plan. You'll have horrible healthcare. You're gonna wait long times, long times. And, he wants to wipe out 180 million private healthcare plans that people love, 180 million plans. I don't think so. I don't think, I don't think he's gonna make it, you know? How do you get elected?
Carolyn Maloney. They gave her an election, they can't even find the ballots. And they gave her a victory, and they can't find that the guy that is against her, who did very well, even though he's even more progressive, I don't even know what she is. I've known her for 25 years. I don't think she's progressive. I think she's whatever she has to be. But this guy probably or possibly beat her. So, rightfully he's not too happy. And they called the election for her and they can't find the ballots. Wants to force you to provide free healthcare to illegal aliens, you remember he raised his hand, that will totally drain your wonderful Medicare. Remember the question up there, he's standing up, "Who is willing to give free healthcare to illegal aliens?" And everybody raises their hands like fast. Kamala was right up there. You know, by the way, that will destroy your country, you do know that. Because you can't afford it, and Biden's looking around, "Oh, they all raised their hand." He goes— [laughter] Remember? I remember. I said, "Well, there goes the election for him." [laughter]
And we're doing great. We're rounding it with or without, but we're gonna have with, but you know, with is better, but with or without, we're rounding that corner, and we're rounding it fast and they [gestures to media] don't wanna give us any credit because they wanna keep this up 'til November 4th. And on November 4th, the press will probably say—let's say something stupid happened. The press will say, "I got to admit he did a damn good job." [cheers and applause] Right? No, no. And the other clown will be in office. You know, we did a thing called price transparency. I signed it. It's effective, as a very complicated. It's on your medical. And we did price transparency. It's the biggest thing. It's bigger than healthcare. Wait 'til you see. Your prices—you can go now to hospitals, you can price operations, you can price everything. It's a massive thing. The man who did it, the man who did it, it's a—and I took a lot of heat.
No, if it holds true—There a lot of jobs, a lot of jobs, a lot of great thinking, but he wants to give free healthcare to illegal aliens. Now, what that's gonna do is destroy our country, because two things happen. Number one, we can't afford it. Number two, everybody is gonna come pouring into our country if you do that.
You know, right now, they're staying wherever they are. When you say, "We're gonna give you free education, we're gonna give you free healthcare. We're gonna take care of you. Everything's gonna be perfect. We're gonna give you, every single family," now watch, they'll print this. "We've checked it out, and he lied about this."
The Biden agenda would collapse our economy and destroy your country. It would destroy your Social Security and protections for preexisting conditions, it will. He's gonna drain your Medicare by giving away our healthcare to illegal immigrants. And I will tell you this, you're gonna have socialized medicine. That's as sure as you're there. [booing] And Obama lied 28 times when he said, "You can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan." It was a lie. Said it 28 times, that we have, but it was a lie. But now you're really losing your doctor. You're gonna have socialized medicine. Eliminate private healthcare insurance for 180 million Americans who love their healthcare. They have the best in the world.
His running mate sponsored the socialist takeover of healthcare. You saw that. He wants to ban private insurance. You're gonna lose—180 million people are gonna lose their healthcare under this Biden character, and he has no clue. They're gonna take it away from him. They're gonna be running him ragged. "Sign this. Sign this." "Okay. What is it?" "Doesn't matter. Just sign it, President, right now." "I'm getting tired. I'd like to rest, I'd like to let Kamala take over as president." [shouting]
We have a, a super V, not just a V because you look at what's happening with the numbers. They're very good, beyond good. Next year is gonna be a great year, or whether we allow Sleepy Joe Biden to impose a four-trillion-dollar tax hike, abolish American energy, shut down the economy, destroy the suburbs, he's gonna destroy the suburbs, low-income housing going all over the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens, and demolish our God-given rights.
The Biden agenda would collapse our economy and destroy your country. He'd destroy your Social Security and protections for pre-existing conditions, drain your Medicare by giving away your healthcare to illegal immigrants, eliminate private health insurance for 180 million Americans that absolutely love it. They love what they have with their health insurance. And his running mate sponsored the socialist healthcare takeover that would ban private insurance. So all of those 180 million people would lose their private healthcare, their private insurance.
We'll end surprise medical building, require price transparency. That's a big deal. That's probably bigger than healthcare. It's already signed, it goes into effect on January 1st, and further reduce health insurance premium, and very importantly, the cost of prescription drugs. I just signed favored nations clauses, meaning we have to have the lowest prices. They have to be comparable to the lowest prices in the world. Right now, they are many times higher, which is ridiculous.
Sleepy Joe Biden wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike, ban American energy, destroy the suburbs, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. How about that one? And you know the bad part about that? You know, we all, we all have heart. We wanna take care of people. Problem with that is, everybody's gonna come to the United States. People that weren't even thinking about it, they're gonna say, "Oh man, these idiots are giving free healthcare, free college education. They're giving free everything. They're giving a Rolls Royce to every family that enters through the southern border."
And I wanna tell you, if you go back a few months before this pandemic, we were gaining, gaining, gaining. We had an insurmountable lead on China. I always heard they were gonna catch us by 2019 for 10 years. We were so far beyond, we were doing much better than they were. The Biden agenda would obliterate our economy. He'd destroy Social Security, destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. That's what he's going to do, drain your Medicare by giving away your healthcare to illegal immigrants. He would end our travel bans on jihadist regions and increase refugee admissions by, listen to this, over 700%. And this is the manifesto with Bernie Sanders, with Crazy Bernie. He made this deal with Crazy Bernie. And by the way, a lot of the Crazy Bernie voters last time, four years ago, voted for Trump because of trade, because they understand, the one thing they do understand, they've been— that our country's been ripped off for years.
But on November 3rd, Pennsylvania, we'll decide whether we end the pandemic, defeat the virus, and return to record prosperity just like we were before—[cheers and applause]—or whether we allow Sleepy Joe Biden, who doesn't have a clue, to kill the recovery, raise your taxes, delay the vaccine. [booing] Yeah, it's true. He wants to impose a four trillion-dollar tax hike. Do you believe? Four trillion. [booing] Ban American energy, which means what? Hey, let's go back. Let's call up the Middle East and let's be real nice to them because we need their energy. No, thank you. Destroy your suburbs. You know, I got rid of this regulation that was gonna destroy your suburbs. Destroy your suburbs. The Obama—I call it the Obama Regulates. They're building nice projects right next to your beautiful home. Lots of luck. Give free healthcare. I hope the people in the suburbs realize, when I did this, I took a lot of heat. I got rid of a regulation. They all said, "Sir, we'll amend the regulation. We're gonna amend it." I said, "I don't wanna re-... amend it."
So all you people in the suburbs that say, "I don't know, I'm making up my mind." And Cory Booker was the one that was going to lead it out. He was gonna be the one. He wants it to be—Wants those projects to be nice and big. I just hope you, I just hope you're gonna remember that, sooner than November 3rd, because you can do it sooner, give free healthcare to illegal aliens. So, the problem with free health care—We all have a heart, we all want to take care of people. The problem is when you promise free education, free healthcare, all this stuff, and free healthcare. Remember Sleepy Joe during the debate? "Who wants to give free healthcare to illegal immigrants?" And everybody immediately raises their hand, you know, radical left, raises. And Joe—Do you remember? That's a classic. He's [guttural sounds]. [laughter] Remember? Sleepy Joe. And he'll do it because he has no choice because they have total power. He's like a puppet for them and indoctrinate your children with poisonous anti-American lies. [booing] To combat the toxic left-wing propaganda in our schools, I announced last week that we are launching a new pro-American lesson plan for students called 1776 Commission. [cheers and applause]
If elected, Biden would destroy Social Security and destroy protections for preexisting conditions, people with preexisting conditions, drain your Medicare by giving away your healthcare to illegal immigrants. They're all gonna come in. If you have that, the problem is, "We're gonna give you healthcare," they're gonna all pour into the United States and our country can't afford it. We wanna be nice, we all have hearts, country can't afford it. They would get people that never even thought of coming if they see that. Can't do it. They would end our travel bans on jihadist regions. We have very strong—Remember I got travel bans. Everyone thought it was such a terrible thing, such a terrible person. He's such a terrible person. I'm such a bad guy, I got travel bans. And increase refugee admissions by more than 700%, opening the flood gates to radical Islamic terrorism. Ban school choice and all charter schools, they're very important. In the second term, I will provide school choice to every parent in America. [cheers and applause]
We will maintain America's unrivaled military might, and we will ensure peace through strength. [cheers and applause] We will surprise, and think of, surprise medical billing, we're going to end it, surprise. You ever walk into a hospital, oh, gee, fix you up. Oh, great. Then you get a bill for 2,000 dollars for a Band-Aid. We will end surprise medical billing, require price transparency, which I've already signed and brilliantly starts on January 1st. Hey, you better vote for me. [laughter] You know, that's one of the—I think that's, in a way, bigger than healthcare. Can you imagine Biden if he won? What—Price transparency is so big, it's all done, it starts on January 1st. How smart is that? How smart? You're gonna see numbers and reductions like you've never seen. Could you imagine if he were president, "Sir, our medical costs have dropped in half. Price transparency has been unbelievable." "What is that? What is price transparency?" And they'll explain it to him. He still won't have a clue.
On November 3rd, Florida will decide whether we end the pandemic and return to record prosperity, or whether we allow Joe Biden to kill the recovery, delay the vaccine, impose a four trillion dollar tax hike, ban American energy, which he wants to do, destroy the suburbs. He's gonna destroy the suburbs. Give free healthcare to illegal aliens, which means millions and millions of people are gonna pour into our country—[booing]—and indoctrinate your children with poisonous anti-American lies in their class, in their school room. [booing]
Joe Biden opposed the mission to take out Osama bin Laden. He opposed killing Soleimani. He voted for the Iraq War. He backed the disastrous Iran Nuclear Deal. And he cheered for the rise of China as a positive development for our country. I don't think so. [booing] That was a disaster. Now Biden has put forward the most dangerous and extreme platform of any major party nominee in history. The bad news is he doesn't even know what the hell it is. [laughter] The Biden plan would destroy Social Security and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. It will drain your Medicare by giving free healthcare to illegal immigrants that will come over to this country by the millions when they see this. End virtually all immigration enforcement and impose totally open borders. He would terminate our travel bans on jihadist regions. Remember I got that approved? They kept saying, "Oh, he lost. He lost. He lost." And then I won in the Supreme Court. We have a travel ban. Guess what?
Took Executive action to ensure price transparency and healthcare. That will be one of the biggest things, and most people have no idea what it means. And I said—some people said, "That's bigger than health care."

We will create a national clemency project to right wrongful prosecutions and to pardon individuals—[cheers and applause]—who have reformed their life. You saw Alice, right? We love Alice. She had another 24 years to go. Can you believe it? She served 22 years, she had another 24 years to go. It was ridiculous. And she's a great woman. Create a ladder of opportunity for African American children by delivering school choice to every parent in America. So important. [cheers and applause] Give Black churches the ability to compete for federal resources for their communities. [cheers and applause] Bring better and tailored healthcare to address the historic disparities that we've had for so many years. You know that. This includes investing in treatments for kidney disease, diabetes, high blood pressure, sickle cell disease—
TRUMP: Your party doesn't say it. Your party wants to go socialist medicine and socialist healthcare.
TRUMP: Joe, you've had 308,000 military people dying because you couldn't provide them proper healthcare in the military. So don't tell me about this.
WALLACE: Well, all right. All right. Let's talk. We've got a lot to unpack here, gentlemen. We've got a lot of time. On healthcare, and then we'll come back to Roe V. Wade.
TRUMP: Because they want to give good healthcare.
BIDEN: Good healthcare.
WALLACE: You, in the course of these four years, have never come up with a comprehensive plan to replace Obamacare, and just this last Thursday you signed a largely symbolic Executive Order to protect people with pre-existing conditions five days before this debate. So my question, sir, is what is the Trump healthcare plan?
TRUMP: Well, first of all, I guess I'm debating you, not him, but that's okay. I'm not surprised. Let me just tell you something. There's nothing symbolic. I'm cutting drug prices. I'm going with Favored Nations, which no President has the courage to do because you're going against big pharma. Drug prices will be coming down 80 or 90%. You could have done it during your 47 year period in government, but you didn't do it. Nobody's done it. So we're cutting healthcare.
BIDEN: He has not done healthcare.
BIDEN: I'll tell you what, he is not for any help for people needing healthcare.
BIDEN: Because he, in fact, already has costs 10 million people their healthcare that they had from their employers because of his recession. Number one. Number two, there are 20 million people getting healthcare through Obamacare now that he wants to take it away. He won't ever look you in the eye and say that's what he wants to do. Take it away.
TRUMP: No, I want to give them better healthcare at a much lower price, because Obamacare is no good.
BIDEN: He has no plan for healthcare.
BIDEN: He sends out wishful thinking. He has Executive Orders that have no power. He hasn't lowered drug costs for anybody. He's been promising a healthcare plan since he got elected. He has none, like almost everything else he talks about. He does not have a plan. He doesn't have a plan. And the fact is this man doesn't know what he's talking about. [crosstalk].
Biden's agenda would be a catastrophe for Seniors. For years, Biden tried to cut Social Security and Medicare. Now Biden is pledging mass amnesty and federal healthcare for illegal aliens - decimating Medicare and destroying Social Security. Biden cares more about illegal aliens than Senior Citizens. While I am President, NO ONE will touch your Medicare or Social Security.
WELKER: All right, let's move on to American families and the economy. One of the issues that's most important to them is health care, as you both know. Today, there was a key vote on a new Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett, and healthcare is at the center of her confirmation fight. Over 20 million Americans get their health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. It's headed to the Supreme Court, and your administration, Mr. President, is advocating for the court to overturn it. If the supreme court does overturn that law, those 20 million Americans could lose their health insurance almost overnight. So what would you do if those people have their health insurance taken away? You have two minutes uninterrupted.
Joe Biden will ship your factories to China, impose a $4 trillion dollar tax hike, eliminate private healthcare, abolish the entire oil industry, and send your state into a crippling depression.
STEVE DOOCY: Well, thank you very much. And we are honored because you selected our show to be the first TV interview you did as president. So it's great that you would us today as well. I know that the Trump team has worked the last four years in the RNC to build a network of people, who you registered and who could get out the vote, especially for today. And so it all comes down to that. But for the person who is undecided on this election day morning, and let's say, they're trying to decide between you and Joe Biden, but they've had a rough year. The pandemic has been tough on everybody. Maybe somebody in their family has lost a job. Maybe they're worried about their healthcare. What do you say to that person? To say, go give me another four years. Let's not switch horses right now.

They will impose total open borders so that people can pour into our country, and they will give them free healthcare, free welfare, and the right to vote in your elections. You won't ever win—[booing]—another election as a Republican. They even want to take down the wall. The wall, I won on the wall too. We won on a lot of things. "Take down the wall," I heard him say it the other day. "We will take down the wall." You know, we have the strongest border we've ever had now. We're almost finished with the wall. [applause] Strongest border, right, Sonny? And we built it despite—it's incredible, the effect it's having. We built it despite, rather, rather, everybody said no chance. I mean, we had a whole very powerful Democrat party oppose me. And yesterday, I don't know if you saw it, the Court just ruled that the money I took was taken legally. So at least we have a legal wall. [applause] The Appeals Court. So, we took it, and we built the wall and we'll be finished with it very soon, but it's had a tremendous impact on illegal immigrants coming into the country. And by the way, we want people to come into our country, you see that by the vote I got, but we want people to come in legally and through merit. Through merit, where they can help us. [applause] The radical Democrats will implement nationwide catch and release. You know that is? You catch a killer, you catch a rapist, and you say, "Oh, thank you very much. Please give us your name. Oh, come back in three years. We're going to put you on trial. Oh, Good." [booing] You never see them by the way. Remember I had that debate with Joe Biden? He said, "No, they come back." Yeah, they don't come back. They don't come back. No. They don't come back. Like, never. Maybe 1%, but I doubt it. That's the end of 'em. You let them loose in our country. I got rid of it. You think that was easy?
They want to rip down buildings and rebuild them with no windows. I like windows, I like big, beautiful windows. He wants to do a total government takeover of healthcare that will destroy your doctor's offices and rural hospitals. So, if you are sick, if you have a cold go to a hospital, wait online for about three days, and hope you get a decent doctor. Ossoff also supports a crippling nationwide lockdown. He wants you to lock your home nice and tight after you're inside of it, and he passes legislation to let hardened criminals go free, get them out of jail, get them out of jail. Ossoff will be a complete tool for the radical left donors who are trying to buy Georgia Senate seats. Do you see the money these people have raised? I mean it's, it's, really, uh, very, uh, well, of course I just raised $250 million, and I should say. I didn't raise it, it just came. I said, how are we doing on that front? Because, you know, we didn't get great publicity, boy were they—they were so happy these guys [pointing to media]. You might not be happy in a few weeks, you know, you might not. [applause] No, they were so happy. I said, "How's fundraising going?" They said, "Sir, about 250 million." I said, "250 million what?" "Dollars." How the hell did that happen? Because people believe in what we're doing, that's why. They believe in what we're doing. [applause] But that's why Ossoff's donations come from Silicon Valley, San Francisco and the other liberal places, and they don't come from Georgia. This is not your fau—I know you. You're with me, I'm with you, we've always had wins from primaries to two elections. We won two elections, believe it or not. I think I won the second one by more than I won the first one, I do, right? [applause] Bill, I won the second one by more.
And the people that understand those values are Kelly and David. They understand those values. And, you're with our law enforcement, right? A hundred percent. I don't have to ask her that. They'll allow heroin, cocaine, fentanyl, and other deadly drugs to flood across our borders again and poison our youth. They'll take away your healthcare. They'll eliminate private insurance. We have 180 million people that love their private insurance. You can forget about it. And you'll lose your doctor. Remember President Obama said, "You can keep your doctor. You can keep your plan." Guess what? He said it 28 times. That was a lie. That was a lie. That turned out to be a big, great scam lie. And remember, I got rid of the individual mandate, the most unpopular thing in Obamacare, [cheers] fighting a lot of different fronts, which really doesn't make it Obamacare anymore, by the way.
David's opponent, Jon Ossoff is an unhinged radical leftist. He's not a Senator. He's not a Senator. That's, that's not a Senator. Ossoff said that he's very proud to be endorsed by socialist crazy Bernie Sanders. He's weak on China. He promoted Chinese propaganda, and then he failed to disclose his business ties to the Chinese communist party. Other than that, he's a wonderful guy, right? Ossoff supports the largest tax hike in American history. If they get in, Warnock and Ossoff, if they get in, you're gonna have the largest tax increase that you've ever had. It'll be the largest tax increase in the history of our country. For what? The Green New Deal. Let's rip down a building because its windows are too big. Let's build a building with no windows. Among many other things. He supports the insane Green New Deal, which would crush middle-class parents trying to raise a family. He will support the socialist takeover of American healthcare, which will lead to rationing poverty and death. Ossoff also backed the radical left-wing crusade to defund police. The last summer, he proudly joined the anti-police mob, he didn't like the police. He doesn't like our police. We love our police. [cheers and applause] Slandering our brave men and women in blue. If you vote for Jon Ossoff, he will attack our heroes. He will destroy our economy, and he will betray you and your family. And it'll happen very quickly. That's why you must vote. And really importantly, get out tomorrow. Vote for David Perdue. He's a great gentleman. He loves you.
And then, we get on to tax reductions, which I like. The House legislation does so much for you. It gives the States Medicaid flexibility. And some of the States will take over their healthcare. Governor Rick Scott in Florida said, just send me the money—they run a great plan. We have States that are doing great. It gives great flexibility.

I'm honored to be here today with many of your tremendous modern-day leaders. We're joined tonight -- and I want you to give him a nice hand, because he's on our side -- got to take care of our people, right? (Applause.) And he's got a lot of power for the people of Kentucky. Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell -- where is he? (Applause.) Come here, Mitch. Thank you, Mitch. How you doing, Mitch? Hey, Mitch, are we going to be okay? Everything good? That healthcare is looking good? Good. Thanks, Mitch.

I mentioned that the other day to a group in my office. We're going to be doing some trade deals as soon as we get the healthcare finished. Oh, I'm looking forward to these trade deals. They're the ones -- ooh. There's going to be no ambiguity. But I used the word "reciprocal." You know, Harley Davidson makes great motorcycles. They were in my office. They were in my office. And they came in -- I said, how you doing? "Great." How's business? "Great." How do you overseas? "Well, it's tough. We have some countries that charge us a $100 [sic] import tax." I said, 100? 100 percent. Think of it. They want $100 [sic] -- 100 percent. So I said, how do you do? "Not so well. It's tough."

And it's important to realize how we got to Obamacare in the first place. Back in 2009 or 2010, House and Senate Democrats forced through a 2,700-page healthcare bill that no one read and no one understood. By the way, today it's thousands of pages more. It's not even understandable. They ignored the public, they ignored the voters, and they jammed a massive failed healthcare takeover right through Congress.

And remember, we're going to negotiate, and it's going to go to the Senate and back and forth. The end result is going to be wonderful and it's going to work great. Once this is done, we are also going to work on bringing down the cost of medicine by having a fair and competitive bidding process. (Applause.) Some people think that's just as important as healthcare.

We have some crazy, arcane laws, folks, just in case you haven't heard. I am confident that if we empower the American people, we will accomplish incredible things for our country, not just on healthcare but all across our government. And, by the way, that Second Amendment is very, very safe right now. (Applause.) I promised. I said we're going to save the Second Amendment. I promise you we are going to save the Second Amendment. It's very, very safe. We would not be in good shape if a certain other person won this election, I could tell you. You would not be happy. And if they came to make a speech, 250 people would have showed up.

And then, we get on to tax reductions, which I like. The House legislation does so much for you. It gives the States Medicaid flexibility. And some of the States will take over their healthcare. Governor Rick Scott in Florida said, just send me the money—they run a great plan. We have States that are doing great. It gives great flexibility.

She's doing great. If Democrats gain power, they'll also be planning a takeover of American healthcare and that would be socialism, what they want to do. The Democrat plan would obliterate Medicare and eliminate Medicare Advantage for more than 121,000 West Virginia seniors who depend on it. Republicans will protect Medicare for our great seniors who earned it, and by the way, who paid for it. Right? You paid for it. [applause]
I heard him talk about telling the truth. He was talking about you have to tell the truth. And yet 28 times he said you can keep your doctor if you like your doctor. You can keep your plan if you like your plan. They were all lies. Over and over again you heard that. Just used it to pass a terrible healthcare plan that we are decimating strike by strike. You saw what happened to the individual mandate, the most unpopular part. And we actually had Obamacare killed except for one Republican vote and any Democrat--one Democrat and we would have had it obliterated and you would have had great healthcare. But we're doing a lot to make it a lot better until we do get rid of it.
Democrats' plan to destroy healthcare, also includes rating Medicare to fund benefits for illegal immigrants. I'm sure you don't mind that. As we speak, Democrats are openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to violate our laws and to over run our borders.
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
That's such an important thing. They've been trying to pass that for decades. I got it done. After years of surging premiums, the cost of healthcare is finally coming down. We're getting the cost of healthcare down. And last month, I proudly signed the largest bill to fight the opioid epidemic. It's the largest bill in American history. [applause]
Democrats even want to give welfare and free health care to anyone who crosses our border. They want free healthcare, free education, free anything.
