We've put in place the first steps in our immigration plan: ordering the immediate construction of the border wall, putting an end to catch-and-release, expediting the removal of criminal—this is so important to me. From day one, I've said it, and I mean the immediate removal of criminal aliens. They're going to be gone, fast. And finally, at long last, cracking down on sanctuary cities.

Most illegal immigration is coming from our southern border. I've said many times that the American people will not pay for the wall, and I've made that clear to the Government of Mexico.

We're going to be doing immigration work that's going to be outstanding, and we're going to have people coming into our country based, hopefully, on a merit system, not just coming in randomly. But they're going to be coming in based on a merit system where they can help us. Because I have companies moving into this country—you saw what happened with the automobile industry last week with five major plants. We have companies pouring back into this country for the first time in anybody's memory. We are actually going to be, fairly soon, at a point where we're going to need workers. Our country is going to do so well. But the tax cuts are going to be a major, major part of it.

On issue after issue, House Democrats are way outside of the American mainstream. Nowhere in the Democrats' extremism—and nowhere can you see anything displayed more clearly than on immigration. A vote for House Democrats is truly a vote for open borders, people pouring into our country, pouring in. We have no idea who they are. They're coming in—open borders.
4,000 killings and they want to abolish ICE. No thank you. And by the way, the ICE folks, they're tough and they're smart and they're great and they love our country. Just remember that. One in five Federal prisoners is a non-citizen. You don't hear that ever. Illegal immigration is also deeply unfair to American workers including African-American workers. My Administration will always protect Mississippi workers from unfair and illegal competition. A nation's first duty is to take care of it's own citizens.
Which by the way is under siege, in case you haven't noticed. Protect your Medicare and Social Security. Confirm your great judicial nominees and save our courts with incredible pro-Constitution judges. We will fight every day to secure the border, to stop illegal immigration, to pass Kate's Law. End sanctuary cities. End chain migration. Cancel the visa lottery and keep the criminals and drug dealers and terrorists the hell out of our country. [applause]
Illegal immigration is also deeply unfair to American workers, including African-American workers. People don't realize what happens. My administration will always put the citizens of our country first. The policies of open borders are a threat to every community.
With your support, we will fight every day to secure the border, stop illegal immigration, pass Kate's Law, end sanctuary cities, end chain migration, cancel the ridiculous visa lottery, and keep the criminal drug dealers and terrorists the hell out of our country. [applause]
Many of us have campaigned on the same core promises: to defend American jobs and demand fair trade for American workers; to rebuild and revitalize our Nation's infrastructure; to reduce the price of health care and prescription drugs; to create an immigration system that is safe, lawful, modern, and secure; and to pursue a foreign policy that puts America's interests first.
Now Republicans and Democrats must join forces again to confront an urgent national crisis. Congress has 10 days left to pass a bill that will fund our Government, protect our homeland, and secure our very dangerous southern border. Now is the time for Congress to show the world that America is committed to ending illegal immigration and putting the ruthless coyotes, cartels, drug dealers, and human traffickers out of business.
This is a moral issue. The lawless state of our southern border is a threat to the safety, security, and financial well-being of all America. We have a moral duty to create an immigration system that protects the lives and jobs of our citizens. This includes our obligation to the millions of immigrants living here today who followed the rules and respected our laws. Legal immigrants enrich our Nation and strengthen our society in countless ways. I want people to come into our country in the largest numbers ever, but they have to come in legally. Tonight I am asking you to defend our very dangerous southern border out of love and devotion to our fellow citizens and to our country. No issue better illustrates the divide between America's working class and America's political class than illegal immigration. Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders while living their lives behind walls and gates and guards.
Meanwhile, working-class Americans are left to pay the price for mass illegal immigration: reduced jobs, lower wages, overburdened schools, hospitals that are so crowded you can't get in, increased crime, and a depleted social safety net. Tolerance for illegal immigration is not compassionate; it is actually very cruel.
But illegal immigration hurts all Americans, including millions of legal immigrants, by driving down wages, draining public resources, and claiming countless innocent lives. You see what's going on, folks. You know what's going on. They give you all of these phony stats. They say, "Oh, it's the same. It's the same." It's not the same. It's a bad situation going on, and we've stopped it. We are taking out thousands and thousands of people from MS-13. We're bringing them the hell out of our country, thousands. [applause] But if we had proper border security, including a very powerful wall, we wouldn't have to work so hard. And it would be a lot safer and a lot better.
My Administration is committed to ending illegal immigration, while modernizing our legal immigration system, which has been in terrible shape for many, many decades, to prioritize the admission of those who can support themselves for them financially and contribute to our economy, people that come in on merit, merit, merit. [cheers and applause]
And the fact is, illegal immigration is a heartbreaking human tragedy. One in three women is sexually assaulted on the very long and dangerous journey north up to our country. Sex traffickers, these are the worst human beings on earth, exploit our porous border to sell young girls and women into modern day slavery. You wouldn't even know that nobody knows that. And by the way, do you think they come in through the ports of entry?
Both parties should come together to finally create a safe and lawful system of immigration. The American people have waited long enough. We must secure the border, pass Kate's Law. [cheers and applause] End Catch and Release, shutdown Sanctuary Cities—you know, we need Democrat votes to do that. Deport criminal aliens and keep the coyotes and traffickers and drug dealers the hell out of our country, please. [cheers and applause]
When I ran for President, my first speech, I mentioned the word "rape." The press went after me; I couldn't believe it. I said, "Will it be like this always?" [Laughter] The answer was yes. It even got worse. From day one, I mention the word "rape." If you look at that speech, that was so innocent compared to what's really happening. That was a very innocent speech compared to the real facts. Illegal immigration is not compassionate. It's inhumane, unjust, and cruel. The media fights me on this, but I say it: Mothers who love their daughters, when their daughters are getting ready to make that 2,000-mile trek up through Mexico—and frankly, I wish Mexico would stop them at their northern border, at our—I wish Mexico would stop them. Because you know, they have a border. They call it their southern border. It's 2,000 miles down from our southern border. I wish Mexico would stop them.
Border Patrol recently reported apprehending 7,000 unlawful migrants in a single week on just one part of the Texas border, a couple of weeks ago. Our immigration system is stretched far beyond the breaking point. To confront this national security crisis, last month, I declared a national emergency. A national emergency. And when I see these people—and they're good people—some Senators, mostly—I tell you, the House has been fantastic.
Illegal immigration is also deeply unfair to American workers and taxpayers, including millions and millions of hard-working legal immigrants. If you care about helping immigrants and care about their success, if you care about reducing poverty and raising living standards, then you must support a safe, strong, and very, very secure border.
We need an immigration policy that helps all Americans thrive, flourish, prosper. We need an immigration policy that's going to be great for our corporations and our great companies. We need an immigration policy where people coming into our country can love our country and love our fellow citizens. And this includes shutting down sanctuary cities.
Not my fault I inherited this mess, but we're fixing it. We have to end chain migration, and we have to cancel the visa lottery. Every American, no matter where they're born, will benefit from the creation of a lawful immigration system. It is such—you talk about an emergency. Our immigration system is so broken, folks. It's so broken. It's so sad to see. It's incompetent. It's laughed at all over the world.
Sadly, on immigration and so many other issues, Democrat lawmakers have totally abandoned the American mainstream. But that's going to be good for us in 2020. They're embracing open borders, socialism, and extreme late-term abortion.
We want them to give us a little more help on the border by the way. You know Mexico has the toughest immigration laws in the world. We have the worst, because the Democrats put in things that are so bad, so bad. Catch and release. You catch 'em and then you got to release 'em. [booing] Think of it.
The mass illegal immigration across our border is a direct consequence of Democrat-supported loopholes; Democrat promises of amnesty, amnesty. [booing] You have people coming up... you know they're all met by the lawyers, the lawyers 've... And they come out. They're all met by the lawyers, and they say, "Say the following phrase: I am very afraid for my life. I am afraid for my life." Okay. And then I look at the guy, he looks like he just got out of the ring, he's a heavyweight champion of the world, he's a freyfra [sic]. It's a big fat con job, folks. It's a big fat con job.
Nothing is more dangerous than the Democrats, crazy immigration agenda. We want it solved. We're building the wall by the way. [cheers and applause] We're gonna have over 400 miles of wall built by the end of next year.
The President. You know, we can get money for anything. They were willing to give me money for every single thing, more money than I wanted. I said, "I don't need that much money, give me money for the wall." "We're not giving you anything for the wall." You know why? Because politically they don't like it. So, I went out and did it a different way. And we have the money for the wall, and we're building the wall. [cheers and applause] Because their entire party has been taken over by far-left radicals, who want to nullify and erase American borders. They want open borders. They want open borders. [booing] They want people to pour in, and they think that's going to be votes ultimately for them. These left-wing extremists don't believe America has the right to enforce our immigration laws or decide who gets to enter and remain in our country. Not gonna be that way.
The Republican Party believes America has not only the right, but the absolute duty to control our borders and to enforce our laws. [cheers and applause] And we believe the immigration system must put the needs of American workers and families first. And people can come into our country. We need people to come in. We have so many companies coming. They need workers. But they have to come in legally and they have to come in through merit. [cheers and applause]
Yet—while, wealthy liberals preach open borders, they live behind gates and guards, they send their families to the best doctors and private schools. And while pushing immigration policies that drain the public services, every-day citizens depend on you, and they depend on you, I depend on you. because we can change our immigration laws —I used to say in 45 minutes, it's really 15 minutes, it's so simple.
The flood of illegal migration is the direct consequence of Democrat-backed policies that prevent border violators from being promptly returned home. They're allowed to stay in our country. Catch and Release. They're allowed—you catch them and then you have to release them. [booing] It is crazy. Congress has to fix these horrible immigration laws. We have to end human smuggling, stop human trafficking, shut down sanctuary cities, deport criminal aliens and replace visa lotteries and chain migration with immigration systems based on skill, and talent, and merit.[cheers and applause]
Nothing is more dangerous than the Democrats crazy immigration agenda. Democrats believe that everyone in the world has the right to violate our borders. They want open borders, disrespect our laws, and come into our country and collect benefits, courtesy of the United States taxpayers. Thank you very much. Right? [booing]
By the end of next year and we'll conclude it pretty shortly thereafter. We'll have the whole thing sealed up and it'll be a lot easier. It's very tough when you have the worst laws on immigration, the worst loopholes. Catch and release, you catch somebody and then you have to release them. Oh, that's a wonderful plan. [booing]
Republicans believe that you, the American citizen, have the absolute right to have your laws and borders enforced and enforced strongly. It's your country—[cheers and applause]—We believe that a welfare program should be protected for truly needy Americans, not for illegal aliens that come into our country illegally. We believe that our immigration system should put the jobs and safety of American families first.
We need the votes. We have to go through Congress. How we ever ended with this stuff is incredible, but they don't mind it so much because they don't mind crime. They don't mind crime. No nation can tolerate a massive, organized violation of its immigration laws, and no one should run for office without an iron clad pledge to protect and defend America's borders. Shouldn't be allowed to run. [applause]. And to confront this crisis, as you saw that it was a big deal two months ago. I declared a national emergency, which is what it is. This is an invasion. When you see these caravans, starting out with 20,000 people, that's an invasion. I was badly criticized for using the word invasion, it's an invasion and it's also an invasion of drugs coming in from Mexico, OK. It's an invasion of drugs.
We made cars, they sent them through the United States that won't happen anymore. Under the USMCA, it'll be prohibited—[applause]—It it'll be economically prohibited. Our current immigration crisis is the result of Democrat backed policies that prevent border crossers from being swiftly returned home. A border crosser comes in, you say, "Sorry, we're taking you home." And that's if you're nice, and I want to do that.
Congress must act to fix our horrible immigration laws. We must end catch and release. Stop human smugglers. Have you seen what's happening? Human smugglers, human traffickers. Have you seen what they're doing?
We have to shut down sanctuary cities, deport criminal aliens, and replace the visa lotteries—the chain migrations with a modern system of immigration. We have to do it. On issue after issue the Democrat party is never been further outside the American mainstream. It's never been, I've never heard of anything like what's going on. I want to run so badly.
We'll soon be taking further action to ensure that federal benefits are preserved for hardworking citizens who need them the most. We're also outlining historic pro-American Immigration Reform. It's working its way through, I must tell you, some of it's not gonna happen unless you vote for Republicans in the upcoming election, and I will tell you it's not very far away and you're gonna have great immigration laws.
Right now when you catch somebody, you have to release them. They won't give us the legislation. Whether it's chain migration, or whether it's lottery, they won't give us any—and the asylum procedures are ridiculous. No place in the world has what we have in terms of ridiculous immigration laws.

Mass illegal migration reduces living standards and strains public resources. If Democrat officials had to send their children to those overcrowded, overburdened schools, they would not tolerate it for one minute. What's happening with their policies are horrible. Our immigration laws are a disgrace, and the Democrats can get together with the Republicans and solve the problem quickly. One meeting. [Applause.] 
it's time to pass Kate's law, end sanctuary cities, end catch-and-release, deport vicious gang members, which we're doing, stop human trafficking, stop illegal immigration, and establish a modern immigration system based on skills, contributions, and based on merit. We want people to come into our country based on merit. [Applause.] 
Together, we will continue unleashing the power of American enterprise, so every American can know the dignity of work and the pride of a paycheck. We will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, and lawful system of immigration. It will be a system of immigration that strengthens our country, upholds our values, and protects our way of life.
And you know, to be honest, it's not like they came and we want to take care of people. We got to straighten out our immigration laws. You know in a very short period of time, if the Democrats would give us a few votes, we could solve the immigration problem and it would be so great. Would be so great. [cheers and applause]
On the issue of everything, a lot of issues, Democrats have put the needs of foreign citizens far ahead of our own citizens. Nowhere in this world is there anything like what's happening with immigration, how bad it is. The Democrats, open border policies, deplete our public services, overcrowd our schools and hospitals, and bring crime, drugs and deadly gangs into our community.
Every nation has the right to establish and enforce immigration rules in its national interest. It's very simple, isn't it. It's common sense. It's so simple, and the voters understand it. We expect that those who seek to join our society will obey our laws, revere our Constitution, cherish our history, support themselves financially, and embrace our American values and love our American flag. [cheers and applause] We believe in an immigration system based on merit, merit where they come in. We have so many companies coming in, automobile companies, companies of all types, and we need workers.
To create a safe, modern, fair and lawful system of immigration, we will enact trade deals and they are going like you won't even believe. That doesn't mean the other countries are thrilled with me.
We’re replacing random migration and we’re replacing the lottery system. How about the lottery system? How about lotteries? [booing] This was Chuck Schumer. You put the name in a basket. The country puts the name in a basket and you picked people out of the lottery. Well, let’s see. This one’s a murderer. This one robbed four banks. This one, I better not say. This one, another murder. Ladies and gentlemen, another murderer. Think of this. Do you think they’re going to put their great citizens--they have great citizens; they have great people like we have great people. Do you think those people are going into a lottery? No. And then we get these people coming in and we hold it against the country. The country isn’t based on that, the country, you just take a look, look at the people they put into these lotteries. It’s a disgrace. And how we’ve done this for so many years folks, how we’ve done this. It’s an immigration system that’s totally broken and we’re going to win the House, we’re going to win the Senate, we’re going to win the presidency and we’re going to do a merit-based immigration system. Merit based. [cheers and applause]
Merit based immigration. And we need that, because we have companies coming in from all over the world, and we need good workers. We need good people. We’re down to 3.5% unemployment. We need people.  But we want people to come in based on merit, not based on some lottery put in by a government. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. [applause] We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with those four beautiful words: “Made in the USA” or “Made in America”. Either one. You can use either one. [cheers and applause] Made in America, made in the US.
We need to elect a strong Republican majority to end sanctuary cities. Stop human traffickers, stop drug smugglers, and adopt an immigration system that puts the needs of American workers and families first. [cheers and applause]
Together we will lift millions more citizens from welfare to work, depenence [sic] to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Millions and millions of people. With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause]
Together we will lift millions more from our horrible, horrible situations that have developed over the years. Look at what's happening to Democrat-run cities, every single one of them. We're going to lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. With your help, we will elect for Republicans to Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration.
So, Democrats put illegal aliens before American citizens. Republicans believe that we must take care of our own citizens first. I'm sorry. [cheers and applause] That includes millions of hardworking, lawful immigrants who waited in line, followed the rules, and came into our country legally. [cheers and applause] And among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are Hispanic-Americans who obey our laws, pay their taxes, contribute to our communities, and play by the rules, and they're the ones that wanna see something done, and we are doing it at a level that nobody else would be capable of doing it. Whether you're a first generation or a 10th generation, every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, and is always loyal to you. Your politicians have not been loyal to you. They've been loyal to themselves.
Together, we will help millions more citizens know the dignity of work, the pride of a paycheck, and the satisfaction of a job really well done. [cheers and applause] With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and very lawful system of immigration. And we're going to have a lot done anyway. We already do have a lot done. You saw the figures last week, but we're doing it the hard way. It would be so much easier with a little stroke of the pen. We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with those beautiful, beautiful words, that incredible phrase, "Made in the USA." [cheers and applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years, and we've already started that program. It will happen. We have the medicine. Nobody even knew that.
Here in the Western Hemisphere, we are joining with our partners to ensure stability and opportunity all across the region. In that mission, one of our most critical challenges is illegal immigration, which undermines prosperity, rips apart societies, and empowers ruthless criminal cartels.
The U.S., we have taken very unprecedented action to stop the flow of illegal immigration. To anyone considering crossings of our border illegally, please hear these words: Do not pay the smugglers. Do not pay the coyotes. Do not put yourself in danger. Do not put your children in danger. Because if you make it here, you will not be allowed in; you will be promptly returned home. You will not be released into our country. As long as I am President of the United States, we will enforce our laws and protect our borders. For all of the countries of the Western Hemisphere, our goal is to help people invest in the bright futures of their own nation. Our region is full of such incredible promise: dreams waiting to be built and national destinies for all. And they are waiting also to be pursued.
With your help, we will reelect, and we will elect, a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." [cheers and applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer, and ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years. Nobody thought that could be done. Gonna be done. We will defend privacy, free speech, free assembly, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause] And above all, we will never stop fighting for the values that bind us together as one America. We support, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States. [cheers and applause] We stand with the incredible heroes of law enforcement. [cheers and applause] We believe in the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause]
The path to victory begins with a giant win tomorrow right here in the great state of Louisiana. With your support, we will show the corrupt Democrats in Washington that the American people are not backing down. We will never ever forget. We will send a terrific new Republican governor to Baton Rouge. So tomorrow before the game, get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors and get out and vote Republican. These are two great people, vote for Ralph, vote for Eddie. Get out and vote Republican. With your help, we will lift millions more of our great citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect more Republicans to Congress to create an immigration system that protects American jobs, wages and families.
Nowhere is the Democrat betrayal of our nation more dramatic than on immigration. In recent debates, did you see these debates? Do you believe what I'm competing with? [shouting] I don't know, when I had to compete with Ted Cruz, that was brutal. He was the national debate champion, a story I've never told. I never did that before, right? I ran for office. All of a sudden, I'm supposed to be debating tomorrow night.
In fact, I just signed an executive action to protect American healthcare benefits for all American citizens. Among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are millions of legal immigrants right here in Texas, including millions of patriotic, hardworking Mexican-Americans who play by the rules, pay their taxes, follow our laws, and strengthen our communities. [cheers and applause] Whether you are a first-generation or tenth-generation, and every American citizen, and you do, you've been treated so badly. But you're not being treated badly anymore. You know? We got rid of the individual mandate from crazy Obamacare. [cheers and applause] Every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, your borders, and is always loyal to you for a change. We're loyal to you. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will lift millions of more citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause]
The President. ... more advantages than our own citizens have, more advantages than our own military has. [booing] Jim Hood wants to raise your taxes. He supports taxpayer funding for abortion providers. [booing] He supports illegal immigration, all benefits, and he opposed our travel ban, which is so important that we won in the United States Supreme Court to keep terrorists the hell out of our country. [cheers and applause]
But with your help, we will lift millions more of our great citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. And you have great congressmen here and I'll tell you, I wanna appreciate it, fellas. Warriors, you're warriors. You are warriors. What was it, 196 for and nothing against, right? That doesn't happen with Republicans. It doesn't happen. I always complain. I always say the Democrats are lousy politicians. They have lousy policies. Open borders, sanctuary cities, but they have one thing. They stick together and they're vicious. The Republicans have great policy. In many ways they're better politicians, but they're not as vicious.
Look, he's such a pain, when he needs something for Kentucky like money, like aid, like, he wants me to call one of the many manufacturers now that are coming into Kentucky, "Could you call the head of some company in Japan, please?" I say, "Matt, do I have to do it?" "Please, please." But isn't that really what you want in a governor? [cheers and applause] That's what you want. [cheers and applause] He's such a pain in the ass, but that's what you want. [cheers and applause] And the job he's done, one of the best in the country. Not the best. He's been incredible. Matt is strong on crime and tough on illegal immigration. Thank you. [cheers and applause] He's pro-worker, pro-life, and 100% pro-Second Amendment. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than immigration. They threw you open, and you saw it, all through the years. They threw open your borders to drug dealers, human traffickers, and to vicious MS-13 gang members, and now, we're getting them out of the country by the thousands. [applause] Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure our Southern border, illegal crossings have now dropped 70% since May. And when you look at what's happening over there, there's a good reason for what we're doing. We are building that wall faster than anyone thought it was possible to build, the Army Corps of engineers. We're also confronting the deadly menace of sanctuary cities, which release dangerous criminal aliens into your neighborhoods, school zones, and city streets.
With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress. We're going to be able to do that. We have to be able to do that to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration and many other things. We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, made in the USA. [applause]
On no issue have Democrat politicians more totally betrayed you than on immigration. The radical Democrats open border agenda invites deadly drugs, vicious gangs and dangerous criminals to pour into your communities, your neighborhoods, your state. Right here in Louisiana, our brave ICE officers have arrested criminal aliens, charged or wanted for murder, manslaughter, sexual battery, assault, fraud, forgery, malicious bodily injury, drug dealing, possession of stolen weapons, and child abuse.
To create a fair, safe, sane and lawful system of immigration, we will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful term: Made in the USA. [cheers and applause]
We are finally putting America. First. Past leaders transform faraway nations into blood-soaked war zones. Then they demanded that Americans accept unlimited migration from those same terror afflicted regions. We don't want to do that [booing]. We don't want to do that and we're not doing that. As President, I will not allow our immigration system to be used against us. I will not allow political correctness to put our families in danger and our communities at risk. We won't do it. [applause]
We're doing great on the border or no issue have Democrat politicians become more dangerous than immigration. The Democratic Party wants open borders, which is a betrayal of every mother and father—[booing]—who wants deadly drugs to be kept out of their community. They want open borders. I mean figure this one.
In the Republican Party we believe that all Americans, including millions of wonderful legal immigrants, are entitled to an immigration system that puts their needs first. We want to come first, we want to let people in you know the big door that I used to talk--we want a big door, but people have to come in legally and they have to come in through merit have to come in through—[applause]—but thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, Border Patrol, ICE, law enforcement, incredible people, illegal crossings are down 70 percent since May. And the wall is going up faster than anybody ever would have thought and that wasn't easy getting that it wasn't easy. [applause]
Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane and lawful system of immigration. They don't want to approve loopholes. They don't want to approve anything. They want people to pour into our country, and many of those people are very bad people. With the help of our governor and our great congressmen and senators, we will fight to give school choice to every child in America who needs it [applause].
We gave up on the globalist folks. Ya know let's build the world. Let's forget about our country. Let's just rebuild the world. On no issue have the Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on the issue of immigration. Far left politician--I mean, they're fighting me on the wall, you have no idea. But we're building it and it's fine and we have the money coming in from the military. I've got it from here, from there, from there. Believe me, if I weren't a good developer, you could forget about that wall. I've got here, there, there. Hmm, ah. These people fought me and we've started winning in court. You know what? Speaking of court, we will soon have 182 federal judges, including Court of Appeals. [applause] Nobody can believe it. All because Barack Obama gave us 142 empty seats.
Thanks to Democrat immigration policies, innocent Americans in all 50 states are being brutalized and murdered by illegal alien criminals. Last summer, at least 19 illegal aliens were charged in connection with grisly homicides, including hacking victims to death and ripping out, in two cases, their hearts. Weeks ago, two illegal aliens and members of the savage gang, MS-13, who we are removing from our country by the thousands—[applause]—were charged with relentlessly beating a wonderful, beautiful high school teenager to death with a baseball bat and chopping the body apart with a machete. One of the animals accused was previously released by local authorities in defiance of an ICE demand. ICE warned and said, "You can't let them go." They wanted them. They would do anything for them. They wanted them to hand this animal over for deportation back to his country. Get them the hell out of our country, right?
But together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." [applause]
On no issue have Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than immigration. Every Democrat running for president wants to open the floodgates to unlimited refugees from all around the world, overwhelming your communities and putting our national security at grave risk. My administration has taken bold action to reduce the influx of refugees, and we are making sure local communities like yours have a much greater say about who gets admitted into your own neighborhoods. [applause] Some of these stories are so sad. Some of the stories are so sad. When it comes to setting immigration policy, we always remember this sacred truth: our first duty and our one true allegiance is to you, the American people, before anybody else. We must care for our own citizens first. Democrat immigration policies are resulting in brutal assaults and wicked murders against innocent Americans. I don't know if you even know what's happening. It's terrible. And we've moved out thousands and thousands of MS13 thugs out of our country. [applause]
With your help, we will lift millions of more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact the greatest trade deals ever made. They'll result in more products, proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, made in the USA. [applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine. What we're doing is unbelievable. We're so far ahead of everybody. What we've done in the last three years with the FDA and even the speed of what we're doing, it would take 12, 13, 14 years to get things approved. It's down to a much smaller number, but we're finding new cures for childhood cancer and we are ending the AIDS epidemic in America. We've started the process. Who would've thought that? In 10 years, it's a 10-year process, we will have ended the AIDS epidemic in America, and it could have been started before I came to office. It was just wasted time. We will defend privacy, free speech, free assembly, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. [applause]
On no issue have Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of illegal immigration.
Only this way can we save the America that we love and drain the Washington swamp once and for all. And I have seen that dirty rotten swamp better than anybody else in America. A lot of crooked people, disgusting crooked people. With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause] We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America. Nobody knew that. It could've been done long before I got here. They had the technology. But we're ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years. Isn't that amazing? Who would've thought that's possible? Who would've thought that's possible?
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than that of immigration. [Referring to someone in the crowd.] He goes, "Traitor." Are you having a good time, sir? I think you are. Goes, "Traitor." I guess in a certain way they are traitors, when you think about it. Left wing politicians, I call them the Do-Nothing-Democrats, support deadly sanctuary cities, demonstrating their contempt, scorn and disdain for everyday Americans. These jurisdictions release dangerous, violent, criminal aliens out of their jails and directly onto your streets where they are free to rob, attack and murder American citizens. You have it right here. You have it right here.[booing]
Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration, which now we're already doing. [applause] We're already doing a lot of it. You've gotta get loopholes. You know, you need their votes. We have loopholes, like visa lottery. We put names in a lottery and they come in, they become American citizens. Do you think these countries are giving us their finest? "Oh, let's give them our best citizens, put 'em in." These people are crazy to allow this to happen, so we're stopping it all. But ending catch and release was a very big thing, and we did that with no Democrat help. [applause] They wouldn't do it. It's called loopholes. Who wouldn't want to end loopholes?
But on no issue have Washington Democrats thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of immigration. [shouting] Left-wing, radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities—[booing]—and remember, a sanctuary city is a jurisdiction that refuses to hand over criminal aliens that are in local law enforcement custody. Instead, they order them to be released into your community. What the hell is going on? [booing] What is going on? And once set loose, these criminal aliens are free to continue their crime spree against innocent Americans. Right here in New Jersey, your state's Democrat leaders have instituted sanctuary policies that result in dangerous predators being set free into your community. [booing]
And I'm also very proud to report that we won a critical Supreme Court victory yesterday on immigration. [cheers and applause] We will now be finally able to enforce federal law, and ensure that those seeking admission to our country are able to support themselves financially and not abuse taxpayer-funded programs. [cheers and applause] They were killing our country, killing our country. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. Frankly, they're crazy. These people are crazy. They're taking their cues from socialists like Bernie. Left-wing lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private healthcare plans, which many people like. [booing] The plans of every Democrat running for President would demolish the economy of New Jersey, where half a million new New Jersey workers are employed at some of the best and most innovative healthcare employment companies. We have them working at the companies, and we have people getting great healthcare. It's been so long. It's finally working and they wanna destroy it.
Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. That's what's happening now. [cheers and applause] We will enact trade deals, the greatest deals ever made, that result in more product proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." Beautiful. [cheers and applause] For decades we had politicians that didn't care about that phrase. That phrase didn't mean anything to them.
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on immigration. Illegal immigration costs our nation hundreds of billions of dollars, drains public services, overcrowds our schools and hospitals, and threatens innocent American lives at a number that you wouldn't even believe. But we've got it closed up, but we're getting your people in. You have people that have worked for you for a long time, don't you? I know the people that you have, and they are hard workers. We have a lot of great people. You have a lot of great people out there. Right here in Des Moines, a twice-deported, illegal alien was charged with shooting and killing a woman, her 11-year-old daughter, and her five-year-old son.
Yet today's Democrat party glorifies illegal immigration. We have no idea, now we do now, but people would come in by the hundreds of thousands. We have no idea who they are. Many are fine people and all of that, but some are stone-cold rapists, and murderers, and people that their countries don't want, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and even Mexico. Right now we have a love affair with Mexico because the Democrats, the Democrats wouldn't give us what we needed and I got Mexico, they're great. They put up 27,000 soldiers on our southern border and the numbers are plummeting, 87% down. [cheers and applause]
Today's Democrat party glorifies illegal immigration, vilifies the heroes of law enforcement, and pledges to dissolve immigration control entirely. They want open borders. They want hundreds of thousands of people to flow into our country. And some of those people, some of those people are stone-cold killers. Some of those people, in the caravans, right? I came up with that name but they won't give me credit for that. They don't give me credit for anything. They don't give me credit for fake news. Wasn't that my term? Now they say, I see CNN, they said, "Fake news has reported," no, no, you're fake news, that fake news is you. You're fake news. [booing]
With your help we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. That's what's happening all over our country. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. It's already happening. We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products made, raised, farmed, and grown right here in the USA. We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America in less than 10 years. We've already started.
Over 130 legislators in this Chamber have endorsed legislation that would bankrupt our Nation by providing free taxpayer-funded health care to millions of illegal aliens, forcing taxpayers to subsidize free care for anyone in the world who unlawfully crosses our borders. These proposals would raid the Medicare benefits of our seniors, and that our seniors depend on, while acting as a powerful lure for illegal immigration. That is what is happening in California and other States. Their systems are totally out of control, costing taxpayers vast and unaffordable amounts of money.
To build on these historic gains, we are working on legislation to replace our outdated and randomized immigration system with one based on merit, welcoming those who follow the rules, contribute to our economy, support themselves financially, and uphold our values.
After years of building up other countries, we are finally rebuilding our country. On no issue of Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than a thing called immigration, right? Before I came into office, the far left's policy of open borders allowed deadly drugs to flow freely into our country and that's what they want. I see them campaigning right down the street. It's really boring to watch, but I try and watch. No, I have an obligation to watch really boring stuff. But they want open borders. They want thousands and thousands of people to pour into our country, many of whom are not exactly what we're looking for, okay? I mean murderers, rapists, and some other things. They're going to be poisoning our children with drugs, including right here in New Hampshire, and you have one of the drug problems in the country. And we brought it down 18% but we have to do better. 18%. [applause]
So, this is [showing piece of paper to the crowd]--because we mentioned—Alyssa, I made minor changes. They mentioned illegal immigration. This is about immigration. This is a, this was a song from the 1950s, Al Green. And they mentioned--little changes to it, that's okay. But they mentioned illegal immigration, right? And, I used to do this a lot and people couldn't get enough of it, to be honest with you. And I haven't done it for a while, and I thought I'd do it tonight because you're on the eve of giving us an opponent, and all of these people want open borders. They want open borders. And we don't want open borders. We want very strong closed borders. And we want people to come into our country, but they want to come in through merit and we want them to come in legally, right? Right? [applause] Through merit and legally. Right?
So, we'll do this quickly. This is illegal immigration. It's called–oh, listen to how quiet it is... . Listen to how quiet. Now watch how quiet it gets. It gets so quiet. But this is all about–I love you too. That was a guy that said that, [points to the crowd] but I love him too. I love everybody. Ready? So important. Illegal immigration.
The President. That's a dirty swamp. You have some really evil, dirty, horrible people. Like to say nice, everyone's nice. They're not good. They're not good people. But we're draining that sucker slowly but surely. With your help, we will lift millions of more of our citizens from welfare to work—[applause]—dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [applause] We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase Made in the USA. We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America in less than 10 years. How about that? It'll be done. We will land the first woman in the moon and become the first nation in the world to plant its flag on Mars. We're very advanced. All made in the USA. We will defend privacy, free speech, religious liberty, and the right to—keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than immigration. You know it almost better than anybody. Anybody, Doug. You know it better than anybody, what they've done on your border, but we're stopping that border. That border is clogged, and we've started the big wall right in Arizona. We've built a lot of wall. That's a big one. [cheers and applause] That's a big one. Top of the line.
Illegal immigration costs Arizona taxpayers more than 2 billion dollars every year. Two billion you're paying. Nearly 20% of Arizona's annual budget in general funds goes toward this big problem.
At stake in our present battle is the survival of our nation. It is. This election is so important. It's the survival of our nation. If you want your children to inherit the blessings that generations of Americans have fought and died for to secure, then we must devote everything we have toward victory in November of 2020. [cheers and applause] You're the forgotten people no more. You're no longer the f–... Right? No deplorables, right? No deplorables. Who knew that was gonna turn out to be such a disaster? But you know, she used the worst word. What was the word she used? "Irredeemables," right? I thought that was the problem. No, it was deplorables. So what the hell do I know about politics? She said, "You're irredeemable and deplorable." I said, "Oh, that irredeemable's terrible." The next day people are showing up. Women, "I'm a deplorable." [cheers and applause] Only this way can we save the America we love and drain the Washington swamp, which is vicious, horrible, ugly, and evil. Much worse than I thought. But we're getting there and not pleasant. A bunch of really bad people, very dishonest people. With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to independence, and from poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will continue to enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with those beautiful, beautiful words and phrase. I love the phrase, "Made in the USA." Made in the USA. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than on immigration. Right? Every day Democrats' open border policies are harming and killing innocent lives. In this region alone, last year ICE officers arrested over 2000—And by the way, our ICE officers, these guys are tough and they're brave. [cheers and applause] Over 2000 criminal aliens, that's MS-13 gangs, thousands, and they bring them back to where they came from. And by the way, now their countries take them back. They weren't taking them back, safe third agreements. They take them back. Charged or convicted of dangerous offenses including robbery, rape, and murder. We bring them back and in some cases we don't even wanna bring them back. We have to put them. I don't wanna house them for the next 50 years, but you know what? We don't want to take chances either, but we'll bring them back to Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Mexico. We bring them back. They didn't use to take them. They said, "We don't want them back." "Oh, okay, we'll keep them ourselves." We don't do that anymore. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. You know that. Right? Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will continue to enact great new trade deals like we've been doing. I'm going to India next week and we're talking trade. They've been hitting us very hard for many, many years, but I really like Prime Minister Modi. We gotta talk a little. We gotta talk a little business. They've been hitting us hard.
On no issue of Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than the issue of immigration. Every Democrat running for president supports free federal welfare for illegal aliens funded by you, the American taxpayer. They wanna treat illegal aliens, people that come into our country illegally, better than they wanna treat our military and our veterans. [booing] Not only does illegal immigration drain our treasury, but it threatens innocent lives. I recently invited to the White House the granddaughter of a 92 year-old woman who was raped, beaten, brutalized, and murdered by an illegal alien who had previously been set free in New York City.
Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system, finally, of immigration. We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer, infectious diseases like we're working on right now, and ending the AIDS epidemic, nobody thought this was possible, in less, now, than nine years, and it should have been started before. We will end the AIDS epidemic. Who would have thought we could have done that?
Nowhere has the American left more thoroughly violated this sacrosanct principle than on immigration. Illegal immigration costs American taxpayers hundreds and hundreds of billions of dollars a year, funds that could be used to improve our schools, roads, hospitals, and other vital services. Instead, Democrats want to take even more of your money to give illegal aliens free health care, free Federal welfare, free education. They get treated better than they want to treat our military and our vets. And it—I stopped it. But it's crazy.
The Democrat Party's immigration policies empower bloodthirsty cartels that maim, murder, and torture; that smuggle and traffic innocent human beings; that flood our communities with poisonous drugs. The left's immigration policies are not compassionate; they are heartless, merciless, and cruel.
And we're doing well in Pennsylvania I hear, right? And South Carolina, I know we're doing great there. [cheers and applause] Also with us tonight is a man who's really become a good friend of mine. We were going at it a little bit at the beginning, but I will tell you, and I would say if, if I didn't get along, I would not be here. I wouldn't do this. I think he's been tremendous. He's been a tremendous supporter and things that we've wanted to do, and fights that we've had which were so important, he's been right up, and Lizzie will tell you that he's been right up in front and really he deserves another six-year term, and probably a lot longer than that, but he's gonna come up and I'm gonna ask Senator Thom Tillis, come on up. [cheers and applause] Thom has really been incredible, he's been working everyday. And he really wants to fight the radical left and he does it and he knows how to fight, and take care of our amazing veterans, and stop illegal immigration. Thom is a champion for the people of North Carolina. This November, we need everybody to go and vote for Thom, he's doing great. He's doing great. I hear he's way up in the polls, he's way up in the polls. Thom, say a few words. Come here.
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on the issue of immigration. Every Democrat running for president supports free federal welfare for illegal aliens, on your tax. [booing] Not only does illegal immigration drain our treasury, but it threatens innocent lives. As just one heartbreaking example, two illegal aliens in Maryland who had been previously charged with attempted murder were released, unaccountably released, and they went on to murder a teenage girl beating her with a baseball bat and slashing her with a machete. The entire Democratic field supports deadly sanctuary cities, which release dangerous criminals to terrorize your communities. Right here in North Carolina, believe it or not, the sanctuary county of Durham released an illegal alien criminal, who then proceeded to viciously murdered a young 19 year-old woman last year, you know all about it, killing her and dumping her body into the woods.
Only this way can we save the America we love, and drain the Washington swamp, which is, by the way, much more vicious, much dirtier, much deeper than I ever thought, but we are kicking ass, let me tell you that. We are kicking ass. [cheers and applause] With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause] And we will continue with the great Thom Tillis. We will get Thom Tillis. Thom, I don't, I don't think anybody even wants to run against you, Thom, but we're gonna reelect Thom Tillis. Is that right? We're gonna reelect Thom Tillis. And if we don't, I'm gonna be so angry at you. [shouting] I'll only come back here a few times a year, if that's okay. No, Thom is gonna be great. Thom, I think you're in great shape. I think you're in great shape. One more hand for Thom Tillis, please. [cheers and applause] We don't even know who's running against him. Nobody wants to run.
Korea, I renegotiated the deal. I took a horrible deal. That was a Hillary Clinton special. That was a Hillary Clinton special. She said, "We have to make this deal with South Korea. It's going to mean 250,000 jobs." And she was right, for South Korea, 250,000. [shouting] And China's entry into the World Trade Organization was supported by Sleepy Joe Biden. That was one of the worst deals economically in the history of our country. When China joined the World Trade Organization, they became— They were flatline for decades. They became like a rocket ship. He voted for the war in Iraq. He voted for mass amnesty for illegal aliens. He supports sanctuary cities and now Biden wants to end immigration enforcement and require, he wants to require you to provide free healthcare for millions and millions of illegal aliens, okay? [booing]
And we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration that puts American workers first. [cheers and applause] We will revitalize our cities, and we will build gleaming new roads, bridges, tunnels, and airports all across our land. We will enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." It's so beautiful, so beautiful. "Made in the USA." That's happening too. We have so many plants coming into Michigan and so many other states. We have car plants coming in, would have never come if I wasn't president, would have never come. We will become the world's premier pharmacy, drug store, and medical manufacturer. That's already started. We're bringing it back. [cheers and applause] We will keep America out of foolish, stupid, ridiculous foreign wars. We will never hesitate to kill America's terrorist enemies. [cheers and applause]
And perhaps no area did the Washington special interests try harder to stop us than on my policy of pro-American immigration. [applause]
Liberal politicians claim to be concerned about the strength of American institutions. But who exactly is attacking them? Who is hiring the radical professors, judges and prosecutors? Who is trying to abolish immigration enforcement and establish speech codes designed to muzzle dissent.
Uh, on perhaps no issue, though, have our opponents been more thoroughly betrayed, they have just betrayed the working families of all backgrounds, than on the subject of immigration. They betrayed our nation. If you look at what the Democrats have done on immigration, they made it very difficult for us, but we broke through, and now we're doing phenomenally on immigration, the best numbers we've ever had.
By contrast, Biden has promised open borders, zero deportations, outrageous taxpayer giveaways for illegal aliens, tremendous tax increases. He wants to increase your taxes, quadruple your taxes. Biden wants to return to the same weak immigration policies as the Obama administration had that allowed MS-13 to spread all over Virginia. You were one of the biggest victims, your state, of MS-13, and we've cleared 'em out. ISIS done, by the way, a fantastic job.
Joe Biden opposed the mission to take out Osama bin Laden. He opposed killing Soleimani. He voted for the Iraq War. He backed the disastrous Iran Nuclear Deal. And he cheered for the rise of China as a positive development for our country. I don't think so. [booing] That was a disaster. Now Biden has put forward the most dangerous and extreme platform of any major party nominee in history. The bad news is he doesn't even know what the hell it is. [laughter] The Biden plan would destroy Social Security and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. It will drain your Medicare by giving free healthcare to illegal immigrants that will come over to this country by the millions when they see this. End virtually all immigration enforcement and impose totally open borders. He would terminate our travel bans on jihadist regions. Remember I got that approved? They kept saying, "Oh, he lost. He lost. He lost." And then I won in the Supreme Court. We have a travel ban. Guess what?
Senator Perdue has been a tremendous leader on pro-American immigration reform. Like nobody else. He voted very powerfully when I was going through hell on the wall. They would have given me anything. They gave me the money for the military. They just didn't want to give me money for the wall. So, I took it out of the military. What the hell could I—? That was rather good. It's good to be a developer every once in a while. That was the one where the judges ruled yesterday. So, they said it was fine because I called it national security. So, we took it out of the military—they didn't figure that one out. Now they do. But you know what? They don't have to be careful because it's turned out to be very popular, very successful.
When Georgia needed a strong voice in Washington after Hurricane Michael, remember Hurricane Michael? And I was down here with David, but David Purdue led the charge to get the workers and farmers of your state the relief you deserved. He said, "Sir, can we get a billion dollars?" And I said, "We're gonna get it David." And we got it very fast. And there was no mechanism to get it. You got hit with a hurricane the—like you have never seen before, came in from a location that is just very unique. It was a horrible thing. I was here for a long time with David, and he worked and he, and his uh, his kin, you know, his kin, the great Sonny Perdue, our Department of Agriculture, our Secretary of Agriculture was fantastic also. But we worked very hard, and we got the farmers and the businesses the money that they had to have. And now they're thriving. David has also been one of the most courageous advocates fighting for an immigration system that defends American workers, American wages, American families, and American jobs. He led the effort in Congress to build the wall. That's right. And Kelly helped on that she's a little bit newer to the Senate, but she helped a lot. Those last moments you were there, without you it wouldn't 've happened, actually. Cracked down on deadly sanctuary cities, and chain migration and institute on parallel protection for our great citizens. He fought to help us replaced NAFTA disaster with the brand new USMCA, they said it couldn't be done. A giant victory for Georgia, for workers, and for farmers all over our country. NAFTA was the worst trade deal probably ever signed. And that maybe has to exclude some of the crazy deals and things they did with China. We voted to confirm nearly 300 federal judges. We have a record on federal judges, and three Supreme Court justices, which is a tremendous thing. We have almost 300 federal judges committed to interpreting our Constitution as written. No one fights harder for the people of Georgia than David Purdue.
Lastly, and very importantly, we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place. We don't want them in our country.
Decades of record immigration have produced lower wages and higher unemployment for our citizens, especially for African-American and Latino workers. We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.
We are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration, to stop the gangs and the violence, and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities. I have been honored to receive the endorsement of America's Border Patrol Agents, and will work directly with them to protect the integrity of our lawful, lawful, lawful immigration system. Lawful.
Tonight, I want every American whose demands for immigration security have been denied – and every politician who has denied them – to listen very very closely to the words I am about to say.
My plan is the exact opposite of the radical and dangerous immigration policy of Hillary Clinton. Americans want relief from uncontrolled immigration. Communities want relief.
Yet Hillary Clinton is proposing mass amnesty, mass immigration, and mass lawlessness. Her plan will overwhelm your schools and hospitals, further reduce your jobs and wages, and make it harder for recent immigrants to escape the tremendous cycle of poverty that they're going through right now and make it almost impossible to join the middle class.
Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.
Anybody ever hear of NAFTA? [Laughter] I ran a campaign somewhat based on NAFTA. But we're going to start renegotiating on NAFTA, on immigration, and on security at the border. And Mexico has been terrific, actually terrific. And the President has been really very amazing, and I think we're going to have a very good result for Mexico, for the United States, and for everybody involved. It's very important. It's a very, very important thing.

We are in the middle of a crisis on our southern border. The unprecedented surge of illegal migrants from Central America is harming both Mexico and the United States. And I believe the steps we will take, starting right now, will improve the safety in both of our countries. It's going to be very, very good for Mexico. A nation without borders is not a nation. Beginning today, the United States of America gets back control of its borders, gets back its borders. Thank you. I just signed two Executive orders that will save thousands of lives, millions of jobs, and billions and billions of dollars. These two orders are part of an immigration reform we outlined during the campaign.
Here is a brief summary of what actions are contained in my Executive orders. The Secretary of Homeland Security, working with myself and my staff, will begin immediate construction of a border wall. So badly needed. You folks know how badly needed it is as a help, but very badly needed. This will also help Mexico by deterring illegal immigration from Central America and by disrupting violent cartel networks.
Pundits talk about how enforcing immigration laws can separate illegal immigrant families, but the families they don't talk about are the families of Americans forever separated from the people they love. They don't talk about that ever. As your President, I have no higher duty than to protect the lives of the American people. First, these families lost their loved ones. Then, they endured a system that ignored them, while at the same time constantly rewarding those who broke the law. For these families, it's been one injustice after another. But that all turns around beginning today.
Acting Attorney General Boente. Judge Gorton, who wrote that decision, had a very good analysis where he referred to immigration law, and I thought it was a terrific opinion. And I think it's the right opinion.
Sheriff Mahoney. I want to thank you too for seeking the input and guidance of our Nation's sheriffs on issues like immigration. My community is looking for immigration reform, an expedited way for a good immigrant to obtain citizenship in this great country. And I appreciate the invitation today to join you and look forward to working with you on many of these issues. Some we'll disagree on, but far more we're going to agree on.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. President, you know we have been invited to the White House before. And we've sat at this table with the former administration. But this is totally different. Not once did the President go around the room and ask the sheriffs what were issues that were important to us, he or she, in our parts of the country, but rather, it was an outgoing message about gun control, about other things. You asked us what is important to us, whether it's mental health in the jails, opioid addiction. You hit on them right off the bat: the border, immigration, vetting. We appreciate that. That has not happened before. We've been here before, but we've never had a President to sit down and listen to what it is that we're facing representing our constituents and public safety across this country. And that's why we appreciate it. That's why we're here today with you.
We have an increased threat, since I was a United States attorney, from terrorism. Mr. President, you've spoken firmly on that. You've led this Nation to say we're going to respond effectively to the threat of terrorism, and you can count on your Department of Justice to do so in an effective way. And you've said something that I believe—and I think the American people believe—that we need a lawful system of immigration; one that serves the interests of the people of the United States. That's not wrong, that's not immoral, that's not indecent. We admit a million people a year plus, who—lawfully, and having—we need to end this lawlessness that threatens the public safety, pulls down wages of working Americans.

You want low-cost American energy also, which means lifting the American restrictions on oil, on shale, on natural gas, and on clean, very clean coal. We're going to put the miners back to work. The miners go back to work. You want us to enforce our immigration laws and to defend our borders. You want fair trade deals and a level playing field. We don't have a level playing field. Because you understand that when American workers win, America as a country wins and wins big. And every country over the last long period of time has been taking advantage of the stupidity of our politicians. It's not going to happen any longer.

By stopping the flow of illegal immigration, we will save countless tax dollars, and that's so important because the tax—the dollars that we're losing are beyond anything that you can imagine. And the tax dollars that can be used to rebuild struggling American communities, including our inner cities. We are also going to save countless American lives. As we speak today, immigration officers are finding the gang members, the drug dealers, and the criminal aliens, and throwing them the hell out of our country. And we will not let them back in. They're not coming back in, folks. If they do, they're going to have bigger problems than they ever dreamt of.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security. By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone. We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos. We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

Switching away from this current system of lower skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families—including immigrant families—enter the middle class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy, indeed.

Uncontrolled immigration -- you see what's going on there; that's happening quickly. Little problem with the courts not wanting to give us the decisions that should be given -- but we're going to win it -- and a financial system stacked against the American people.

Since the day of my election, we've already cut illegal immigration at the southern border by 61 percent. (Applause.) Sixty-one percent that we haven't started. And the courts are not making it easy, folks. They're not making it easy.

The President: No. Because, um, I'm at odds on, you know, the NATO payments and I'm at odds on immigration. We had unbelievable chemistry. And people have given me credit for having great chemistry with all of the leaders, including el-Sissi. ...

The President: Yes. Yes. That's our policy. I am not saying ... long-term, we are going to have to fix the problem, the whole immigration problem. But I will tell you: Right now we have a great gentleman, one of my real stars is Gen. Kelly, now Secretary Kelly. We are down 73 percent at the border, we are cleaning out cities and towns of hard-line criminals, some of the worst people on earth, people that rape and kill women, people that are killing people just for the sake of having fun. They are being thrown in jails and they are being ... all over the country and nobody's ever done it like us, so we are being unbelievably thorough with that. We are out in Long Island cleaning out the MS-13 scum, they are all scum, that's probably the worst gang anywhere on Earth. ...

And Attorney General Sessions is putting our priorities into action. He's going after the drug dealers who are peddling their poison all over our streets and destroying our youth. He's going after the gang members who threaten our children. And he's fully enforcing our immigration laws in all 50 States. And you know what? It's about time.

You know, they're trying to use this number against us because we've done so unbelievably at the borders already. They're trying to use it against us. But you need that wall to stop the human trafficking, to stop the drugs, to stop the wrong people. You need the wall. But listen to this: We've already seen a 73 percent decrease—never happened before—in illegal immigration on the southern border since my election—73 percent.

And the world is getting the message. They know that our border is no longer open to illegal immigration and that if you try to break in, you'll be caught, and you'll be returned to your home. You're not staying any longer. And if you keep coming back illegally after deportation, you will be arrested, prosecuted, and you will put behind bars. Otherwise, it will never end.

Let's also remember that immigration security is national security. We've seen the attacks from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino. Hundreds of individuals from other countries have been charged with terrorism-related offenses in the United States.

Perhaps in no area have past Governments sold out special interests and foreign lobbyists more than on the issue of immigration. Year after year, you pleaded for Washington to enforce our laws as illegal immigration surged, refugees flooded in, and lax vetting threatened your family's safety and security.

In just 100 days, we have taken historic steps to secure our border, impose needed immigration control like you've never seen before—is that true?—and properly screen and vet those seeking admission into our country. They are going to come in because they love our country. We're not taking them otherwise.

We are operating on a very simple principle: that our immigration system should put the needs of American workers, American families, American companies, and American citizens first. I appointed a great military general, John Kelly, to lead the Department of Homeland Security.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

And we're achieving these goals by eliminating these job-killing regulations, unlocking American energy, rebuilding our military, pursuing fair and reciprocal trade deals, achieving massive reductions in illegal immigration, transforming the Department of Veterans Affairs, and building a new partnership among nations to defeat terrorism, which we have to do.

Secretary of Homeland Security John F. Kelly. Mr. President, proud to be here. Certainly very proud to represent the quarter of a million men and women that serve the country in DHS. In the 5 months that I've been in the job, we have gone a long way to facilitate the—improve the legal movement of people and commerce across our borders and, yet at the same time, have gone a long way to safeguarding our borders, particularly the southern border, working with all of our partners to the South. A 70-percent drop in illegal immigration. While we still welcome legal immigrants to the tune of over a million a year, we are no longer a friendly environment for illegal border crosses.

But others don't treat us fairly. That's why I believe the time has come for new immigration rules, which say that those seeking admission into our country must be able to support themselves financially and should not use welfare for a period of at least 5 years. And we'll be putting in legislation to that effect very shortly.

We have also issued new directives to protect our police officers and our sheriffs. And we'll always stand with the incredible men and women of law enforcement. All American children, no matter where they live, have the right to grow up in a safe community. No issue is more central to public safety than the issue of immigration and border security. After years of lawlessness, the United States is now enforcing our laws—first time in a long time—and protecting our workers, our schools, and our families.

The media—these people—like to talk about separating families. But the families they never talk about are the American families separated forever from the ones they love because we don't protect our borders and uphold the immigration laws of the United States.

The President. And we came down the escalator—that famous escalator ride, Melania, myself—and the place went nuts, hopefully, because they like me, but I think also they like the policies. I said the truth. I talked about immigration. I talked about what was happening on the borders. I talked about our military. I talked about the drug problems, which are tremendous—even in Iowa—tremendous problems beyond anything we've ever seen before.

The President. Since I took office, we have cut illegal immigration on our southern border by record numbers—78 percent.

As we speak, we are working with two wonderful Senators, Tom Cotton and David Perdue, to create a new immigration system for America. Instead of today's low-skill system—just a terrible system where anybody comes in; people that have never worked, people that are criminals—anybody comes in. We want a merit-based system: one that protects our workers, our taxpayers, and one that protects our economy.

For many years, they exploited America's weak borders and lax immigration enforcement to bring drugs and violence to cities and towns all across America. They're there right now because of weak political leadership, weak leadership, weak policing, and in many cases, because the police weren't allowed to do their job. I've met police that are great police that aren't allowed to do their job because they have a pathetic mayor or a mayor doesn't know what's going on. [Applause]

It's essential that Congress fund hundreds more Federal immigration judges and prosecutors—and we need them quickly, quickly—if we're going to dismantle these deadly networks. And I have to tell you, you know, the laws are so horrendously stacked against us, because for years and years they've been made to protect the criminal. Totally made to protect the criminal, not the officers. You do something wrong, you're in more jeopardy than they are. These laws are stacked against you. We're changing those laws. But in the meantime, we need judges for the simplest thing, things that you should be able to do without a judge. But we have to have those judges quickly. In the meantime, we're trying to change the laws. We're also working with Chairman Bob Goodlatte on a series of enforcement measures—and he's a terrific guy—to keep our country safe from crime and terrorism and in particular, radical Islamic terrorism. A term never uttered by past administration. Never uttered. Did anybody ever hear that term? I don't think so. But you heard it from me.

Failure to enforce our immigration laws had predictable results: drugs, gangs, and violence. But that's all changing now. Under the Trump administration, America is once more a nation of laws and once again a nation that stands up for our law enforcement officers. We will defend our country, protect our communities, and put the safety of the American people first. And I'm doing that with law enforcement, and we're doing that with trade, and we're doing that with so much else. It's called America first. It's called an expression I'm sure you've never heard of: make America great again. [Laughter] Has anybody heard that expression? Have you heard that? Have you heard that expression? That is my promise to each of you, that is the oath I took as President, and that is my sacred pledge to the American people.

The President. I also proudly announced legislation this week with Senators Tom Cotton and David Perdue to reform our immigration system to protect American workers and American taxpayers. It's called the RAISE Act—R-A-I-S-E—the RAISE Act.

The most sacred duty of government is to protect the lives of its citizens, and that includes securing our borders and enforcing our immigration laws.

The people of Arizona know the deadly and heartbreaking consequences of illegal immigration: the lost lives, the drugs, the gangs, the cartels, the crisis of smuggling and trafficking. MS-13—we're throwing them out so fast, they never got thrown out of anything like this. We are liberating towns out on Long Island. We're liberating. Can you imagine, in this day and age—in this day and age, in this country—we are liberating towns? This is like from a different age. We are taking these people. They don't shoot people, because it's too fast and not painful. They cut them up into little pieces. These are animals. We are getting them out of here. We're throwing them in jails, and we're throwing them out of the country. We're liberating our towns. You've seen it. You've lived it. And you elected me to put a stop to it. And we are doing a phenomenal job of putting a stop to it. That I can tell you.

After years of defending other countries' borders—can you believe we fight for other countries? We want to defend their borders—we're finally defending our own borders, and we're showing compassion for the struggling American workers who are now starting to see the light, because plants are coming pouring back into our country. And by the way, we're doing a lot of good work on that. But a lot of people are coming back in. We have Foxconn; they make the iPhones, as you know, for Apple. And so many companies are building now in our country, including the auto companies who are coming back. Years of uncontrolled immigration have placed enormous pressure on the jobs and wages of working families, and they've put great burdens on local schools and hospitals. While this may be good for a handful of special interests, it's unfair to working people of all backgrounds, all throughout our country. We want every American community to succeed, including our immigrant communities, but they can't do that if we don't control our borders.

But during that visit, I heard firsthand from the frontline agents about the security threats they confront each and every day, and I pledge my continued resolve to them—and all of you—to keep our country safe. All around the Nation, I have spent time with the wonderful Americans whose children were killed for the simple reason that our Government failed to enforce our immigration laws, already existing laws. And I promised these families, the deaths of their loved ones will not have been in vain. I promised them. I know so many of them.

And that wall is also going to help us, very importantly, with the drug problem and the massive amounts of drugs that are pouring across the southern border. My administration will never back down in demanding immigration control. The American people voted for immigration control. That's one of the reasons I'm here. And that is what the American people deserve, and they're going to get it. So you put pressure. But believe me, one way or the other, we're going to get that wall.

For generations now, the American Legion has taught our young people the principles of "Americanism." You emphasize the need to preserve the Nation's cultural, moral, and patriotic values. You encourage the observation of patriotic holidays. You stress the need to enforce our laws, including our immigration laws. You teach the responsibilities of citizenship and the importance of the Pledge of Allegiance. [Applause] True. So important. And you do it all, as your motto says, "for God and country." That's why we're here today: for America and for God. But to fulfill our patriotic duties, we must take care of our great veterans. One year ago at this gathering—and I remember so many of you so well—I promised you that I would make it my priority to fix the broken VA and deliver our veterans the care they so richly deserve. And you see what's been happening.

He's done a great job for the people of Arizona. He's very strong on borders, very strong on illegal immigration. He is loved in Arizona. I thought he was treated unbelievably unfairly when they came down with their big decision to go get him right before the election voting started, as you know. And he lost in a fairly close election. He would have won the election, but they just hammered him just before the election. I thought that was a very, very unfair thing to do.

We also understand that immigration security is a national—it's really a national treasure, but it's a national security. We need national security for safety. We're going to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. Sorry. Sorry. Call up some of the other countries in the world, say, "How you doing, folks?" Not so good.
We're creating an immigration system that puts American workers and American families first. We're moving quickly to pass a massive tax cut and simplification for the middle class. We want new tax returns. We want simplification. We want reform. And you know what we really want? We want massive tax cuts. That's what we're doing for business. That's what we're doing for the middle class.
Insurers are fleeing. Doctors are quitting. Choices are disappearing. Congress must do its job by ending the Obamacare nightmare. So, so, to deliver for American families, we are also working to pass the RAISE Act, legislation that would end chain migration and switch our country to a merit-based immigration system. Merit, merit, merit. People that will help our country. People that will help our country.
We have Tom Cotton. We have David Perdue. Two great Senators. And they're working on it. The RAISE Act would keep new immigrations from going on welfare for 5 years.
The President. Isn't that nice? They don't walk over and say, I'm going on welfare. Isn't that nice? Maybe keep them from ever going on welfare. And would require them to support themselves and their families financially. It's time to create an immigration system that serves the interests of the United States of America.
Last week, I also sent a letter to Congress outlining my administration's top priorities for immigration reform. This was a bottom-up effort driven by dedicated law enforcement professionals, and they took a big oath to protect our Nation. The Justice Department is doing a fantastic job on the border and with regard to immigration, more than anyone has ever seen before from a Justice Department. Thank you very much, Jeff. It's really had an impact and a very positive impact, and now we're going to take it to five steps further.

Our proposal closes dangerous loopholes and vulnerabilities that enable illegal immigration, asylum fraud, and visa overstays. The visa overstays are just—you're talking about numbers that nobody even knows what they are, they're so out of control. And we're going to take care of that.

Crucially, we've asked Congress to ensure that any proposed immigration reform ends chain migration: One person comes in and then brings everybody in his family in with him or her. And we have to end chain migration, which—it's critical for creating a system that puts American workers and the American taxpayer first.

We must stop the flow of all types of illegal drugs into our communities. For too long, dangerous criminal cartels have been allowed to infiltrate and spread throughout our Nation. An astonishing 90 percent of the heroin in America comes from south of the border, where we will be building a wall which will greatly help in this problem. It will have a great impact. My administration is dedicated to enforcing our immigration laws, defending our maritime security, and securing our borders.
With that being said, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi did not show up for our meeting today. I'm not really that surprised. We have a lot of differences. They're weak on crime; they're weak on illegal immigration. They want the illegal folks to come pouring into our border, and a lot of problems are being caused, although we've stopped it to a large extent, as much as you can without the wall, which we're going to get.

The President. Well, we are very far apart because our views on crime and our views on immigration and the military, so many are different. But a lot of things have happened, even over the last 2 hours with respect to the missile launch. We want our military funded, and we want it funded now. It's going to be bigger, better, stronger—it already is—than ever before. But we want to get going on that now. So that is a difference, in all fairness, from this morning when I told them that we're way, way far away.

That's why I recently withdrew the United States from the United Nations plan for global governance of immigration and refugee policy. No borders. It's a no-borders plan. They have a plan: no borders. I heard about it recently. I said, what are you talking about "no borders"? No borders? No borders. Everybody can come in. If you don't mind, I've rejected that plan. Is that okay? [Applause] Okay?

We've also begun the process of building the wall on the southern border. And we are empowering our immigration officers to do their job, and they're doing a great job. ICE and Border Patrol agents are working so hard, and they endorsed us for the election. I say "us" because it's really not me. It's us, all together. It's us. It's us. We're a group—a big group—a big, beautiful group. I'll tell—all you have to do is look around here.

It's time for Congress to adopt a pro-American immigration agenda. Every Member of Congress should be asked where they stand on these issues: blocking funds to sanctuary cities. I don't want to give sanctuary cities money. Passing Kate's Law to put repeat offenders behind bars for a long period of time. Increasing the number of ICE officers, who are fantastic, and Border Patrol officers, so we can dismantle vile criminal gangs, like, as I said, MS-13 animals. Ensuring that new immigrants to our country are financially self-sufficient and will not be on welfare the day they come in. And as I said, ending chain migration. We want a system that is merit based; they come in on merit. They don't come in—a lottery system. How about the lottery system, folks? You see that?

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

In sanctuary States and cities, innocent Americans are at the mercy of criminal aliens because state and local officials defy Federal authorities and obstruct the enforcement of our immigration laws.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

Unfortunately, Democrats in Congress not only oppose our efforts to stop illegal immigration and crack down on sanctuary cities, now they are demanding amnesty as a condition for funding the Government, holding troop funding hostage and putting our national security at risk. We cannot allow it.

As President, my greatest duty is to protect our nation and to protect our people. As we have witnessed recently, America faces grave threats. Terrorists have struck in the streets and subways of New York City twice in a few months. Both terrorists came to our country through the dysfunctional immigration system that we are correcting and rapidly. And one came through chain migration—chain migration; the other, visa lottery. They have a lottery. You pick people. Do you think the country is giving us their best people? No. [Laughter] What kind of a system is that? They come in by lottery. They give us their worst people, they put them in a bin, but in his hand, when he's picking them is, the really, the worst of the worst. Congratulations, you're going to the United States. Okay. [Laughter] What a system, lottery system. [Laughter]
We're calling for Congress to end chain migration and to end the visa lottery system, and replace it with a merit-based system of immigration. We want a system that puts the needs of American families, taxpayers, and security first.
The President. Important meeting. Thank you very much for being here. We're making a lot of progress on a lot of different things. Today I'm with the Senate working group on immigration. It's become a very big subject. I think that started around November 8 and maybe a year and a half before that, starting with the campaign.

We're all working in an effort to develop an immigration reform plan that will serve the interests of the American workers and the American families and safety. I want to thank Chairman Grassley, along with Senators Tillis and Lankford, Cornyn, Cotton, and Graham for being here today. These are great people. They've become friends of mine, and they love this country. I also want to acknowledge Senator Perdue, who is likewise a terrific person, who has become a very close friend of mine. And he'll be briefed as to what's happening.

Our current immigration system fails Americans. Chain migration is a total disaster, which threatens our security and our economy and provides a gateway for terrorism. Likewise, the visa lottery is bad for our economy and very bad for security. You saw that recently in New York along the West Side Highway.

We need to ensure our immigration officers finally have the resources, tools, and authorities that they desperately deserve and need to save and protect American lives. Even the Border Patrol agents, as you saw recently, killed—a couple of them killed; one very badly hurt. It's a rough job, and they're incredible people, along with the ICE agents. These are incredible people. They've been with me right from the beginning, and they love what we're doing.

That's why our position has been clear and very clear from the beginning. Any legislation on DACA must secure the border with a wall. It must give our immigration officers the resources they need to stop illegal immigration and also to stop visa overstays. And crucially, the legislation must end chain migration. It must end the visa lottery. Dangerous. And I think many of the Democrats agree with us on that now.

Vice President Michael R. Pence. Mr. President, you've made immigration a centerpiece in the national debate over the last year and a half. And—but you said all along the way, we're going to build a wall and reform our immigration system. We're going to enforce the laws of this country for the citizens of this country.

Sen. Graham. Obama couldn't do it. Bush couldn't do it. I think you can do it. There's a deal to be had. If you want it bad enough, we'll get it. It will be good for the country. Everybody has got to give a little bit. But I've never been more optimistic about an immigration reform proposal making it to the President's desk than I am right now.

We have to end chain migration to prevent a future set of new chain migrants coming. And we have to secure our border. We have to enforce our laws on the interior as well, to decrease the illegal immigration that will inevitably encourage overstays.

Senator James P. Lankford. Mr. President, thank you for bringing all of us together. I mentioned to you in September, when you first made the announcement about DACA, that you'd given a tremendous gift to the American people. It's been 20 years since we've had a vote on immigration of any type that's actually passed and become law.

Senator John Cornyn III. Well, Mr. President, thank you for having us here. America is the most generous country in the world when it comes to legal immigration, but that generosity has been abused by people who are exploiting the vulnerabilities we have along the border with the lack of enforcement. And we saw the previous administration that tried to usurp the authority that only Congress and the White House have in passing immigration laws. And they tried to do it by executive action, and the courts just struck that down.

So I do think this is an important opportunity for those of us who care not only about the people and about our legal immigration system that's benefited us all, but also are determined to eliminate and stop illegal immigration, along with the drugs and the harm that that causes. And I do think this is a great opportunity. I hope we make the most of it.

Wall Street Journal: Speaking of being flexible it sounds as if there's an immigration deal that has been struck amongst senators on the hill that's been sent to the White House for approval?

Wall Street Journal: On immigration—could you see yourself signing a bill....

Wall Street Journal: Is there a possibility that Donald Trump could sign a comprehensive immigration bill which would provide a path to legal status, citizenship for 11 million people who are here illegally?

When—on Tuesday you said that you supported the idea of signing comprehensive immigration reform...

So I just want to be crystal clear about this, you're open to discussing comprehensive immigration reform, are you open to discussing a path to citizenship as part of that?

The President: Ready? Comprehensive immigration reform is a far step from DACA. I am always open to discussing everything but that doesn't mean we're going to get anywhere close to getting it done.

The President: And I really believe they have good intention. After we're finished with DACA, assuming that gets done, I would certainly be open to discussing—you know, the comprehensive immigration. I don't know that we'll be able to make a deal on that one.

The President: We're going to see. If we make the right deal. I think they will. These are people that have very strong opinions on DACA and on immigration generally. And I happen to think they're largely right. Look, we're going to try and make a deal on DACA. We have a good chance of making it. What we need is we need the wall, we need security, we need security at the border. We have to stop the drugs from coming in. We need safety and we need a strong military.

Kernen: Well, we're going to have to end it there. I'm just — last question. Will we have another shutdown? Will you move more to the center on immigration ...

Mr. President, I'd like to set the stage a little bit with our illegal activity numbers at the border from last year, which really tell the story of why we need to continue investing in border security, as well as closing the legal loopholes in our immigration system.

So we really believe these dual trends require investments both in smart border security, like a border wall system, but also closing the legal loopholes that we face in our immigration——

The officials here today each took an oath to defend his country or her country. As Congress considers immigration reforms, these are the most important voices for us to listen to, by far. These are the men and women that really know what's happening and that know how to keep America safe. They're real professionals. I was just with them. They're real professionals.

Acting Director Homan. And because of these loopholes, it continues to drive more illegal immigration. It entices more families and children to come.

Now, the Department of Justice—the Attorney General—is dedicating resources to this. He has announced the surging of hundreds of new U.S. attorneys to specifically focus on violent crimes in immigration. He has sent additional prosecutors to our southwest border. They were down there on detail to focus on an emphasis on enforcing immigration and criminal laws.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Cronan. When we don't enforce our immigration laws, MS-13 is able to just reconstitute its jailed members in the U.S. or released members in the—released from the U.S. with more members who are able to cross our borders.

Now, they don't like guns. You know why? They're not painful enough. These are animals. They cut people. They cut them. They cut them up in little pieces, and they want them to suffer. And we take them into our country, because our immigration laws are so bad. And when we catch them—it's called catch-and-release. We have to, by law, catch them and then release them. Catch-and-release. And I can't get the Democrats—and nobody has been able to for years—to approve commonsense measures that, when we catch these animal-killers, we can lock them up and throw away the keys.

Now, this was a rock-and-roll song—little amendments—a rock-and-roll song. But every time I do it, people—and you have to think of this in terms of immigration. We have to have great people come into our—I want people to come into our country. And I want people that are going to help us. And I don't want people that are going to come in and be accepting all of the gifts of our country for the next 50 years and do—and contribute nothing. I don't want that, and you don't want that.

So this is called "The Snake." And think of it in terms of immigration. And you may love it, or you may say, isn't that terrible. Okay? And if you say, isn't that terrible, who cares? Because the way they treat me—that's peanuts compared to the way they treat me. Okay? [Laughter] Immigration.

And as a follow-up to that, if I may -- Mr. President, I know that you follow the development in Sweden closely, especially when it comes to immigration politics. Now that you've spent some time with our Prime Minister, how do you view Sweden in general? What is your take? And also, on our immigration politics? Thank you.
My fellow Americans, protecting the safety and well-being of American citizens is my highest duty as President. Yet lawless sanctuary jurisdictions are nullifying Federal law, obstructing immigration enforcement, and releasing thousands of criminal aliens into U.S. communities to prey on innocent victims. It's absolutely terrible.

And last week, the mayor of Oakland warned criminal aliens of a coming ICE enforcement action, giving them time to scatter and hide from authorities. The mayor's conduct directly threatened the safety of Federal immigration officers and the law-abiding Americans in her community.

Sacramento, CA, County Sheriff Scott R. Jones. Good afternoon, Mr. President. Thank you for inviting me. Obviously, I'm at ground zero for the sanctuary State for California. You know, there's really two different issues that the sanctuary State addresses. And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that California law enforcement, we don't do immigration enforcement in the communities. We want people to have the comfort and confidence to call us if they need help. That's our primary mission. Although, that's the way it's portrayed, that we work arm-in-arm in the communities. We just don't do that. So that piece of it really doesn't affect law enforcement in California.

So we're not going to sweep it under the rug. This Department of Justice is going to back Kirstjen and Homeland Security and Tom and his ICE officers fully and totally. The Federal law is the supreme law of the land. It's been made clear by the Supreme Court that the Federal Government has immigration responsibility. And we're going to do our part, and we expect the cities and counties, if they're going to be partners with us, to participate with us.

Gwinnett County, GA, Sheriff R.L. "Butch" Conway. I'm Butch Conway, the Gwinnett County, Georgia, sheriff. We've cooperated with our partners with immigration in the 20-plus years I've been sheriff.

On issue after issue, House Democrats are way outside of the American mainstream. Nowhere in the Democrats' extremism—and nowhere can you see anything displayed more clearly than on immigration. A vote for House Democrats is truly a vote for open borders, people pouring into our country, pouring in. We have no idea who they are. They're coming in—open borders.
We're having a lot of companies come into the United States. We need workers. And by the way, illegal immigration—which will be probably one part of a question, but I'll give you the answer right now—we want people to come into our country, but we want them to come in based on merit. Because we're going to need these people because we have tremendous numbers of companies coming in, whether it's Chrysler leaving Mexico and coming into Michigan or Foxconn—you know, Foxconn is going to open up a tremendous place in Wisconsin, and we're very proud of that because that was a deal that nobody even thought was happening or could happen.

Frankly, if we have had more Republican votes, we wouldn't have had to give away what we gave away, which many of the people in this room, including me, don't like. Because it was a waste, in many cases. But the Democrats want things. They don't want to focus on crime and borders and people pouring into our country, many of whom are not the people we want to come in. We want a merit-based immigration system. We want people to come in on merit, not based on a lottery; you pick a ticket.

In this age of international crime, smuggling, terrorism, and trafficking, it is also essential that we have strong border security and immigration control. This is fundamental to national defense.

But to protect our families we must secure our borders and the good thing about the caravan: people are watching. People are watching. You watch how horrible--they're coming in from Honduras. They're coming in from other places. They're taking this long trek up Mexico. We want we want Mexico to help us and we have to demand it, but Mexico's going to help us. But there's still hundreds of people that out of maybe 2,000--there's still hundreds of people. And our laws are so corrupt and so stupid they call them the dumbest immigration laws anywhere on earth. If a person puts their foot over the line we have to take them into our country. We have to register them. We then have to ask them a couple of questions, lawyers are telling them what to say, how unsafe they are, and once they say that, we have to let them go to come back to court in like a year. Only one problem: they don't come back, okay that's the end. Welcome to the United States.
But what they're doing is disgraceful. What they are doing—Schumer and the group—what they are doing is disgraceful. And what they're doing to the wall and immigration is disgraceful. And you just take a look at the border. Okay? You take a look. Take a look at what's happening. My administration and conservatives in Congress were elected to uphold your rights, to rebuild our military—which we are doing a great job of rebuilding——to restore our prosperity, to secure our communities, and defend our borders.

Oh, we have the worst immigration laws anywhere in the world. But I'll tell you what—it's not easy for people to come in. I will tell you, it's not. But we have the worst laws. After years of defending the borders of other counties—we go into wars with other countries; we shouldn't be there. We go into wars to defend their borders; we don't defend our own borders. And we're going to start defending our country. We're going to start defending our borders.

Illegal immigration must end. Illegal immigration must end. We are going to have strong borders. I will tell you, we have maxed out every law. We are going to have truly strong—and we're going to take people into our country, but they're going to come in based on merit, not based on picking somebody out of a bin.

We are not going to let our country be overwhelmed. And we're going to demand Congress secure the border in the upcoming CR. It's going to be very soon. Going to be very soon. In recent months, Democratic lawmakers have voted against legislation to close deadly immigration loopholes, like catch-and-release. How about that one? "We caught him. Oh, release him. Bye-Bye." [Laughter] Welcome to America. Welcome to America. That's what we have.

And that's already—we have the worst immigration laws in the history of mankind. We're slowly getting them changed. We want to make it quick. So give me some reinforcements please. OK? [applause] 
So we're building the wall but we're—we're getting it all done. We're going to get rid of catch and release. We're going to get rid of—we're going to get rid of the lottery system. We're going to go eventually—when I get the votes. I need Republicans. We're going to go eventually to a merit-based system of immigration. Merit. You come in on merit. [applause] 
more. And we get them out as fast as we can. We have the worst laws anywhere in the world for illegal immigration. There's no place in the world that has laws like we do.
We're not immigration officers; we never have been, and we're never going to be. We just want to be able to cooperate with our Federal partners so that these folks that end up in our custody and need to be deported, get deported.
The dumbest laws—as I said before, the dumbest laws on immigration in the world. So we're going to take care of it, Margaret. We'll get it done. We're going to ask that man right there, because that man can do it. [Laughter] Right now he's the most important man in the room. Kevin can do it.
When we joined the amicus brief, it was—we recognized that—myself and my councilmembers—was that Federal law reigns over immigration, not the State. What is happening—in listening around this table of what's happening in other communities, I haven't had anything personal from the ICE of illegal immigrations yet, but I know it's coming, because we can't enforce anything. The crime rate is up in California, and it's going to continue to rise as long as these policies——
We're especially moved today to be joined by families who have suffered unthinkable heartbreak at the hands of the MS-13 gangs. I'm truly honored to be joined again by the courageous families who were my guests at the State of the Union—that was a special evening—Elizabeth Alvarado, Robert Mickens, Evelyn Rodriguez, and Freddy Cuevas. Thank you. Thank you all. Thank you. Thank you. Their beautiful daughters, Kayla and Nisa, were murdered by MS-13 gang members, many of whom exploited glaring loopholes—and we have the biggest loopholes of any country anywhere in the world. We have the worst immigration laws of any country anywhere in the world. But they exploited the loopholes in our laws to enter the country as unaccompanied alien minors. They look so innocent; they're not innocent.

Deputy Attorney General Rod J. Rosenstein. Thank you, Mr. President. Under your leadership, Attorney General Sessions has made violent crime and illegal immigration a top priority for the Department of Justice, and we're making tremendous progress. We're working in coordination with Homeland Security and with our other Federal partners, as well as State and local law enforcement.

Behind you is a sign that says, "Secure our borders, protect our communities." That's one sentence with a comma in it. If we do one, we achieve the other. And it's the one thing that you've been trying to do for the 15 months that you've led this Nation. We need border security. We need tougher immigration laws. We need to help communities like this.

Obviously, this is a very touching subject because there's immigration involved, but they have to realize America is based off of immigration. Everybody who came here as an immigrant wanted the American Dream. The American Dream is still there. But if you're going to come here with acts of violence, you can stay in your own country with that, because we don't need it here anymore. Thank you.

But the records are being set, but they still keep coming in. We need immigration laws. We need strong laws. And we're going to get them. It's moving. It's harder and harder for the Democrats to fight it. Look, it's—I'd like to say it's just people doing it. It's—they happen to be Democrats. They're very well unified in this regard, but they're starting to break up now. Finally, they're starting to break up.

We're down on immigration, crossing the borders, more than 40 percent. We were actually down 77 percent. Our economy is doing so well, people are coming across the border. The economy is—it's one bad thing about having a great economy, frankly. But the economy is doing so well that people are crossing the border. In many cases, they're crossing for reasons of good, but in many cases, they're crossing for reasons of really, really bad. But these people are incredible people. And I want to thank you all for being here too. I know what you've gone through. I just want to thank you very much for being here.

And immigration is down much, but we need border wall. We need—we got to have a change in our laws. Our laws are the worst laws of any country anywhere in the world—catch and release. Did you ever hear?
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
Before going any further today, I want to take a moment to address something you've been reading a lot about: the illegal immigration crisis on our southern border. It's been going on for many, many decades and many years. And it has its ups and its downs. And all we need is good legislation, and we can have it taken care of. And we have to get the Democrats to go ahead and work with us. Because as a result of Democrat-supported loopholes in our Federal laws, most illegal immigrant families and minors from Central America who arrive unlawfully at the border cannot be detained together or removed together, only released.

And you ought to see the hearings that are right now on television, but that folks are being—you know, they're going on to the mainstream, fake news media. They want to focus on immigration because they want to keep the cameras away from the hearings, because those hearings are not good for them. In fact, they're a disaster for them. The whole thing is a scam. It's a scam. And what's happened is a disgrace. So we have a House that's getting ready to finalize an immigration package that they're going to brief me on later and that I'm going to make changes to. We have one chance to get it right. We might as well get it right, or let's just keep it going. But let's do it right. We have a chance. We want to solve this problem. We want to solve family separation. I don't want children taken away from parents. And when you prosecute the parents for coming in illegally, which should happen, you have to take the children away. Now, we don't have to prosecute them. But then, we're not prosecuting them for coming in illegally. That's not good.

We're meeting right now on immigration. And we are very strong at the border; we're very strong on security. We want security for our country. The Republicans want security and insist on security for our country, and we will have that. At the same time, we have compassion. We want to keep families together; it's very important. I'll be signing something in a little while that's going to do that. And the people in this room want to do that, and they're working on various pieces of legislation to get it done. But I'll be doing something that's somewhat preemptive, but ultimately, will be matched by legislation, I'm sure.

We have record-setting numbers in every way economically, but we want to solve this immigration problem, which is going on for 40 years—more. It's been going on forever. And we want to see if we can solve it. So we are canceling or postponing the Congressional Picnic tomorrow.

Sen. Sullivan. On the issue of immigration, trade, and investment, these are all areas where Congress has a lot of authority under the Constitution, and you have authority; the executive branch has authority under the Constitution. And I think that's why meetings like this are really important, bringing the leadership on both sides together, because they're important issues. So appreciate the opportunity to let you see our views, hear our views on these issues, where we share authority on important matters. Thank you.

Sen. Alexander. Mr. President, thanks for having us. I think what Dan said was good. We really have—on the issues, on trade, on immigration—we have a partnership under the Constitution. We have some authority; the President has some authority. We need to work together.

And when we were here a year ago, I think I suggested to you that immigration, which has bedeviled us for 40 years, as you've said—I believe you can—you're the President who can help us solve the immigration problem with your leadership. You may be able to do for immigration what Nixon did for China and Reagan did for the Soviet Union. And a lot of us would like to work with you on that.

Senator Thomas B. Cotton. I think it's very important that we protect our border. We cannot allow a child to be a "get out of jail free" card and a "get into the U.S. free" ticket. But at the same time, as you've said—as we've all said—we'd like to keep families together, keep them together at the border for the orderly and timely processing of the adult's immigration claim. If it's a lawful, legitimate claim, we can admit the family into the country. If not, they'll have to go back to their home country.

Senator Lindsey O. Graham. We've got a big massive mess that's been going on for decades, and we're all going to fix it one day, I hope. But we've got a specific problem that puts the country in a dilemma. Here's your dilemma and President Obama's dilemma, our dilemma: If a family shows up at the border and we let the family go into the country, and say, "Please come back for your hearing," about 80 percent of the time, the adults never show up for the hearing. I think most Americans feel like that is bad; it will create a third wave of illegal immigration.

Sen. Hoeven. Thanks for inviting up on these important issues and for having this important discussion certainly on immigration, but also on trade. And the context that I want to make sure we talk about is, we've made incredible progress on tax relief, we've made tremendous progress on regulatory relief, and it's reflected in our economy. Now, if we can do the same thing on trade, think what that means for our country in terms of economic growth, in terms of jobs, in terms of getting wages moving higher, and the impact that has for all Americans.

Senator John Cornyn III. Mr. President, to your point, America is the most generous country in the world when it comes to legal immigration. And I think we ought to draw a very clear line between legal immigration that benefits our country——

Sen. Cornyn. ——and illegal immigration, which is a threat to public safety.

So we came at a time when there were plenty of problems to solve, and one of the big problems is immigration. And I hope that within not too long a distance—and I mean beyond just one problem of immigration. You can mention the word "comprehensive," or you don't have to use it. A lot of politicians don't like the word "comprehensive immigration reform." But I really think we have an opportunity to do the whole immigration picture, and that's what I'm looking to do, ultimately. But right now we want to fix this problem, and I think we'll be able to do that.

But what the President reiterated again yesterday, and he has said every day from when he sought this office, is we have a crisis of illegal immigration. And as the President made clear, we don't want families to be separated. We don't want children taken away from parents. But right now, under the law—and we sit with these lawmakers—we only have two choices before us: Number one is, don't prosecute people who come into our country illegally, or prosecute them; and then, under court cases and the law, they have to be separated from their children.

And I would say, with great respect to the Members of Congress, as the House considers legislation tomorrow and the Senate is considering legislation, the President has postponed the Congressional Picnic—we're calling on Congress to act. Let's roll our sleeves up, let's work the whole problem. Let's end this crisis of illegal immigration.

We are going to see if we can solve the immigration problem like we've solved so many other problems. And I think we'll get it done.

Our country is currently facing a crisis of illegal immigration on our southern border. Democrat-supported loopholes in our Federal laws have enabled roughly half a million illegal immigrant family members and minors from Central America to be released into the United States since 2014, at unbelievably tremendous taxpayer expense. While illegal aliens can only be held for a period of days or weeks, it can take years to move their cases through the legal system to actually try to send them back to their home countries.

We're working very hard on the border with the immigration. We have to be very strong on immigration, but we have to let people in, the right people, where we have a merit-based system. We're developing a beautiful merit-based system so we can fill all of the jobs that you all created. And that's working out very good. But we do have to be very strong. And if we're not, you're going to have millions and millions of people come up, and it's not going to be a good situation. It will be a very bad situation.

Sen. Heller. Mr. President, thank you very much for coming to Nevada—coming back to Nevada. You've been here many times. And for us here in Nevada, and listening to you, and hearing the issues that you discuss—health care, immigration, crime, tax issues, all these issues; how the economy is doing is important for all of us. So I want to thank you for all your hard work and effort.

Well, one of the highest on the list is immigration. And we have to change our laws. We have to make them sensible. They came in to see me last week; they said, "We'd like to hire 5,000 more judges." Five thousand. You ever hear of thing like that? Judges. Well, we're appointing 145 judges here, and everyone goes through this extreme vetting process. You're talking about 5,000. Where do you find 5,000 people to be judges? And you know what it leads? It leads to graft. It leads to a lot of other things.

We want a system where, when people come in illegally, they have to go out. And a nice simple system that works. You know, Mexico holds people for 4 hours, for 5 hours, for 2 hours, and they're gone. We have people for 4, 5, 6 years, and they never leave. So we want to have a great immigration.

The President. That's all we need. Border security. We've got to get going. A lot of bad things are happening, and I think we're doing it incredibly well. We have no tools. We have bad laws. We have the worst immigration laws in the history of the world, okay? So it's a joke. People can't believe it. Other countries look at us, and they say, "How is that possible?" Somebody touches our land, we now take them to a court, to a judge. They want us to choose 5,000 judges. How do you choose 5,000 judges? Can you imagine the corruption just from a normal standpoint? Just common sense. Can you imagine the corruption?

Go to the barbershop. Grab somebody. Make them a judge. Everybody is being made a judge. They want 5,000 judges more. It's crazy. Other countries, it's called: "I'm sorry. You can't come in. You have to leave." This one, we have judges. If they step on our land, we have judges. It's insane. So we're going to have to change our whole immigration policy.

We inherited a lot of different things, but of all of them, immigration is—makes the least sense. It is a hodgepodge of laws that have been put together over years. And we have to change it. It's so simple. It's called: "I'm sorry, you can't come in. You have to go in through a legal process." You don't have to see a judge where the judge is going to take 3 years before you can come back. In the meantime, you never come back, because you're already in the country. You're someplace in the country. And that would be bad, but it's really bad when it's a criminal.

And we have plenty of them coming into the country this way. And they use the children. They use these young children for their own benefit. So we have to change the whole immigration picture. And we'll be able to do it. We need the border wall. We need the border. We need border security, and we need modern equipment. And we'll get it done, I have no doubt.

President Trump. No, I want them to do what they wanted. You know, the problem we have—and I told them this morning, I said, "Hey, pass it, if you can." But I also want them to do what they want. We have a big immigration bill, like everybody does—like you're talking and everybody talks about immigration now, I think, more than ever before.

How did we get here? So, if you look at Jon Tester, he signed up for the Democrats' radical immigration agenda, which is "let them come in, and we believe," they say, "in sanctuary cities where they house the criminals and others." We believe in strong borders and no crime, it's very simple. Strong borders. We believe in coming into this country legally. We believe in coming in legally. [applause]
Big monster. But take a look at that. So they show an arena before the people started coming in. There were a few people, four or five hours ahead, and they apologized -- it's a disgrace. But let me just tell you, the Democrats -- we call them the Democrat party. You know why? The Democratic party sounds too good. Sounds better, doesn't it? I always hate saying, "The Democrat party." A lot of people say, "You meant to say …" Well actually, their name is the Democrat party. The Democratic party sounds too good so I don't want to use it. Okay? The new platform of the Democrat party is to abolish ICE. In other words, they want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely. That's what they want to do. [booing]
We also recognize the vital importance of border security and immigration control. In order to prevent foreign acts of terrorism within our shores, we must prevent terrorists and their supporters from gaining admission in the first place. Border security is a national security problem. And in the United States, we are working very hard to get the Democrats to give us a couple of votes so we can pass meaningful and powerful border security.

It's a very sad situation. It's very unfortunate. But I do not think it's good for Europe, and I don't think it's good for our country. We're, as you know, far superior to anything that's happened before, but we have very bad immigration laws, and we're—I mean, we're doing incredibly well considering the fact that we virtually don't have immigration laws. We have laws that are so bad, I don't even call them laws. I call them—it's just like, you just walk across the border. You walk across the border—you put one foot on the land and now you're tied up in a lawsuit for 5 years. It's the craziest thing anyone has ever seen.

Prime Minister May. The U.K. has a proud history of welcoming people who are fleeing persecution to our country. We have a proud history of welcoming people who want to come to our country to contribute to our economy and contribute to our society. And over the years, overall, immigration has been good for the U.K. It's brought people with different backgrounds, different outlooks here to the U.K. and has—and we've seen them contributing to our society and to our economy.

And the reason I felt it was going to happen was because of immigration. Because I know—I think one of the reasons I got elected was because of immigration, and I felt that Brexit had the upper hand. And most people didn't agree with me. If you remember, Barack Obama said, well, that your country will have to get on the back of the line if that happened, which I thought was a terrible thing to say, frankly.

Catch-and-release. How about that one? You catch a criminal, you take his name, and then you release him. He's got to show up to court within 4 or 5 years. [Laughter] In the meantime, they're committing crime in our country. These are the laws we have to work with. And despite that, we're setting records, but we have horrible, horrible immigration laws, and we're going to get them fixed. You've got to vote Republican, folks. You've got to vote Republican.

On September 11, 2001, America suffered the worst terrorist attacks in our history. The attacks were carried out by foreign nationals who exploited our lax immigration laws and defrauded our immigration system in order to murder nearly 3,000 innocent people. Following the attacks, Congress placed most immigration enforcement functions within a new agency known as the United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, meaning ICE.

One of the critical lessons of 9/11 is that immigration enforcement saves lives. We must enforce the rules against visa fraud, illegal overstay, illegal entry, and other immigration violations and crimes; and crimes they are—believe me, crimes they are. These are the practices exploited by terrorists, drug dealers, child smugglers, human traffickers, gang members, and countless unknown and unregistered criminals to gain illicit access to our country and threaten our citizens.

In recent days, we have begun to take necessary action to achieve that goal. Our Nation has the most generous immigration system in the world. But these are those—and there are those that would exploit that generosity to undermine the values that we hold so dear. We need security. There are those who would seek to enter our country for the purpose of spreading violence or oppressing other people based upon their faith or their lifestyle. Not right. We will not allow a beachhead of intolerance to spread in our Nation. You look all over the world, and you see what's happening.
Prime Minister Abe. Now, in the world, we are also facing the issues of the refugees and terrorism. We need to work closely together on these global issues. Japan have always played our own role, but going forward, we would continue to work with the international community to execute our responsibility in a commensurate manner. And each of our country has immigration control scheme, as well as policy on immigration, as well as refugees. These are to do with domestic affairs of that country, so I would refrain from making any comments.

President Trump. Well, we just began discussions. We are going to have a great relationship with Canada, maybe as good or better, hopefully, than ever before. We have some wonderful ideas on immigration. We have some, I think, very strong, very tough ideas on the tremendous problem that we have with terrorism. And I think when we put them all together, which will be very, very quickly—we have a group of very talented people—we will see some very, very obvious results. We're also doing some cross-border things that will make it a lot easier for trade and a lot better and a lot faster for trade.

Prime Minister Trudeau. One of the things we spoke about was the fact that security and immigration need to work very well together. And certainly, Canada has emphasized security as we look towards improving our immigration system and remaining true to the values that we have. And we had a very strong and fruitful discussion on exactly that.

At the same time, we continue to pursue our policies of openness towards immigration, refugees, without compromising security. And part of the reason we're—we have been successful in doing that over the past year—welcoming close to 40,000 Syrian refugees—is because we have been coordinating with our allies, the United States and around the world, to demonstrate that security comes very seriously to us. And that's something that we continue to deal with.

And, Prime Minister Trudeau, you've made very clear that Canada has an open-door policy for Syrian refugees. Do you believe that President Trump's moratorium on immigration has merit on national security grounds?

You want low-cost American energy also, which means lifting the American restrictions on oil, on shale, on natural gas, and on clean, very clean coal. We're going to put the miners back to work. The miners go back to work. You want us to enforce our immigration laws and to defend our borders. You want fair trade deals and a level playing field. We don't have a level playing field. Because you understand that when American workers win, America as a country wins and wins big. And every country over the last long period of time has been taking advantage of the stupidity of our politicians. It's not going to happen any longer.

By stopping the flow of illegal immigration, we will save countless tax dollars, and that's so important because the tax—the dollars that we're losing are beyond anything that you can imagine. And the tax dollars that can be used to rebuild struggling American communities, including our inner cities. We are also going to save countless American lives. As we speak today, immigration officers are finding the gang members, the drug dealers, and the criminal aliens, and throwing them the hell out of our country. And we will not let them back in. They're not coming back in, folks. If they do, they're going to have bigger problems than they ever dreamt of.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security. By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone. We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos. We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

Switching away from this current system of lower skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families—including immigrant families—enter the middle class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy, indeed.

In the first full month of my administration following the issuance of my Executive orders, illegal immigration on our southern border fell by an unprecedented 40 percent. I want to congratulate General Kelly.

My administration is also following through on our promise to secure, protect, and defend that border within our United States. Our southern border will be protected always. It will have the wall. Drugs will stop pouring in and poisoning our youth, and that will happen very, very soon. You're already seeing what's going on. The drugs are pouring into our country, folks. They are poisoning our youth and plenty of others, and we're going to stop it. We're not going to be playing games. Not going to be playing games. Following my Executive action—and don't forget, we've only been here for like, what, 50 days?—we've already experienced an unprecedented 40-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border; 61 percent—61 percent—since Inauguration Day—61 percent. Think of that.

We're also working, night and day, to keep our Nation safe from terrorism. We have seen the devastation from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino—hundreds upon hundreds of people from outside our country have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in the United States courts. Right now we have investigations going on all over; hundreds of refugees are under Federal investigation for terrorism and related reasons. We have entire regions of the world destabilized by terrorism and ISIS. For this reason, I issued an Executive order to temporarily suspend immigration from places where it cannot safely occur.

The President. The order he blocked was a watered-version of the first order that was also blocked by another judge and should have never been blocked to start with. This new order was tailored to the dictates of the Ninth Circuit's—in my opinion—flawed ruling. This is, in the opinion of many, an unprecedented judicial overreach. The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems—or she—or she. Fortunately, it will not be Hillary she. [Applause] When he or she deems it to be in the national interest of our country——

Anyway, let me just say a few words here about our country. We've come through a torrid time a number of years ago. When I took over the Government back in 2011, we were blocked out of all the markets, the Troika were in town, our sovereignty was gone, our hope was gone; hemorrhage of immigration, and a falloff in all business right across every sector. Now, because of the sacrifices of the people and tough choices made, we're in a different spot. Unemployment, which was 15.2, is now down to 6.6 percent and falling. Employment is the highest in 10 years. A growth rate of 5.2 percent last year. Fourth year running, Ireland is the fastest growing country in Europe. Deficit eliminated next year. Two million-plus working now. I was accused in Cork 3 weeks ago of blocking up the Irish roads with people going to work. [Laughter] That's the challenge of success, I suppose.
And secondly, as a part of the overall immigration reform that the Irish have contributed so much, it would be part of that. And we look forward to the works that will take place at the time ahead.
And this administration, working with Democrats and Republicans, I hope, can sort this out once and for all. And for future years, you determine what it is that you want to do. As George Mitchell said last evening, you can't return to open immigration, but for the people who are here—who should be here, might be here—that's an issue that I'm sure your administration will reflect on. And we in Ireland will give you every assistance in that regard.
We also recognize that immigration security is national security. We must protect our citizens from those who seek to spread terrorism, extremism, and violence inside our borders. Immigration is a privilege, not a right, and the safety of our citizens must always come first, without question.

Migration, immigration, integration has to be worked on, obviously. Traffickers have to be stopped. But this has to be done while looking at the refugees as well, giving them opportunities to shape their own lives where they are; help countries who right now are not in an ability to do so, sometimes because they have civil war. I think that's the right way of going about it. And this is obviously what we have an exchange of views about, but my position is the one that I have just set out for you.

Uncontrolled immigration -- you see what's going on there; that's happening quickly. Little problem with the courts not wanting to give us the decisions that should be given -- but we're going to win it -- and a financial system stacked against the American people.

Since the day of my election, we've already cut illegal immigration at the southern border by 61 percent. (Applause.) Sixty-one percent that we haven't started. And the courts are not making it easy, folks. They're not making it easy.

The President: No. Because, um, I'm at odds on, you know, the NATO payments and I'm at odds on immigration. We had unbelievable chemistry. And people have given me credit for having great chemistry with all of the leaders, including el-Sissi. ...

The President: Yes. Yes. That's our policy. I am not saying ... long-term, we are going to have to fix the problem, the whole immigration problem. But I will tell you: Right now we have a great gentleman, one of my real stars is Gen. Kelly, now Secretary Kelly. We are down 73 percent at the border, we are cleaning out cities and towns of hard-line criminals, some of the worst people on earth, people that rape and kill women, people that are killing people just for the sake of having fun. They are being thrown in jails and they are being ... all over the country and nobody's ever done it like us, so we are being unbelievably thorough with that. We are out in Long Island cleaning out the MS-13 scum, they are all scum, that's probably the worst gang anywhere on Earth. ...

And Attorney General Sessions is putting our priorities into action. He's going after the drug dealers who are peddling their poison all over our streets and destroying our youth. He's going after the gang members who threaten our children. And he's fully enforcing our immigration laws in all 50 States. And you know what? It's about time.

You know, they're trying to use this number against us because we've done so unbelievably at the borders already. They're trying to use it against us. But you need that wall to stop the human trafficking, to stop the drugs, to stop the wrong people. You need the wall. But listen to this: We've already seen a 73 percent decrease—never happened before—in illegal immigration on the southern border since my election—73 percent.

And the world is getting the message. They know that our border is no longer open to illegal immigration and that if you try to break in, you'll be caught, and you'll be returned to your home. You're not staying any longer. And if you keep coming back illegally after deportation, you will be arrested, prosecuted, and you will put behind bars. Otherwise, it will never end.

Let's also remember that immigration security is national security. We've seen the attacks from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino. Hundreds of individuals from other countries have been charged with terrorism-related offenses in the United States.

Perhaps in no area have past Governments sold out special interests and foreign lobbyists more than on the issue of immigration. Year after year, you pleaded for Washington to enforce our laws as illegal immigration surged, refugees flooded in, and lax vetting threatened your family's safety and security.

In just 100 days, we have taken historic steps to secure our border, impose needed immigration control like you've never seen before—is that true?—and properly screen and vet those seeking admission into our country. They are going to come in because they love our country. We're not taking them otherwise.

We are operating on a very simple principle: that our immigration system should put the needs of American workers, American families, American companies, and American citizens first. I appointed a great military general, John Kelly, to lead the Department of Homeland Security.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The Prime Minister and I just finished a productive discussion about the interests of our two countries. Together we discussed crucial issues ranging from national security to trade, to immigration and enhanced economic cooperation. We reaffirmed the tremendous friendship between the United States and Australia and the vital importance of our security and our alliance.

The NATO of the future must include a great focus on terrorism and immigration, as well as threats from Russia and on NATO's eastern and southern borders. These grave security concerns are the same reason that I have been very, very direct with Secretary Stoltenberg and members of the Alliance in saying that NATO members must finally contribute their fair share and meet their financial obligations, but 23 of the 28 member nations are still not paying what they should be paying and what they're supposed to be paying for their defense. This is not fair to the people and taxpayers of the United States. And many of these nations owe massive amounts of money from past years and not paying in those past years. Over the last 8 years, the United States spent more on defense than all other NATO countries combined. If all NATO members had spent just 2 percent of their GDP on defense last year, we would have had another $119 billion for our collective defense and for the financing of additional NATO reserves.

Next, I attended the G-7 right here in Sicily, and made great progress toward very, very vital goals. I laid out my vision for economic growth and fair trade in support of good-paying jobs, and even great-paying middle class jobs and more. And I called for much greater security and cooperation on matters of both terrorism, immigration, migration, to protect our citizens.

In just a short period of time, we've already added nearly 1 million new jobs and approved historic increases in military spending. We've achieved a record reduction in illegal immigration. Did you see at the southern border? Seventy-five percent. Seventy-five percent. If they do one percent in the past, it used to be, oh, we're doing so well. Seventy-five percent. General Kelly is doing a great job.

But others don't treat us fairly. That's why I believe the time has come for new immigration rules, which say that those seeking admission into our country must be able to support themselves financially and should not use welfare for a period of at least 5 years. And we'll be putting in legislation to that effect very shortly.

We have also issued new directives to protect our police officers and our sheriffs. And we'll always stand with the incredible men and women of law enforcement. All American children, no matter where they live, have the right to grow up in a safe community. No issue is more central to public safety than the issue of immigration and border security. After years of lawlessness, the United States is now enforcing our laws—first time in a long time—and protecting our workers, our schools, and our families.

The media—these people—like to talk about separating families. But the families they never talk about are the American families separated forever from the ones they love because we don't protect our borders and uphold the immigration laws of the United States.

The President. And we came down the escalator—that famous escalator ride, Melania, myself—and the place went nuts, hopefully, because they like me, but I think also they like the policies. I said the truth. I talked about immigration. I talked about what was happening on the borders. I talked about our military. I talked about the drug problems, which are tremendous—even in Iowa—tremendous problems beyond anything we've ever seen before.

These beautiful American lives were stolen because our Government refused to do its job. If the Government had simply enforced our immigration laws, these Americans would still be alive today. That's why, since the day I took the oath of office, I have been restoring the enforcement of our immigration laws and the protection and defense of our borders.

The President. Since I took office, we have cut illegal immigration on our southern border by record numbers—78 percent.

As we speak, we are working with two wonderful Senators, Tom Cotton and David Perdue, to create a new immigration system for America. Instead of today's low-skill system—just a terrible system where anybody comes in; people that have never worked, people that are criminals—anybody comes in. We want a merit-based system: one that protects our workers, our taxpayers, and one that protects our economy.

The most sacred duty of government is to protect the lives of its citizens, and that includes securing our borders and enforcing our immigration laws.

The people of Arizona know the deadly and heartbreaking consequences of illegal immigration: the lost lives, the drugs, the gangs, the cartels, the crisis of smuggling and trafficking. MS-13—we're throwing them out so fast, they never got thrown out of anything like this. We are liberating towns out on Long Island. We're liberating. Can you imagine, in this day and age—in this day and age, in this country—we are liberating towns? This is like from a different age. We are taking these people. They don't shoot people, because it's too fast and not painful. They cut them up into little pieces. These are animals. We are getting them out of here. We're throwing them in jails, and we're throwing them out of the country. We're liberating our towns. You've seen it. You've lived it. And you elected me to put a stop to it. And we are doing a phenomenal job of putting a stop to it. That I can tell you.

After years of defending other countries' borders—can you believe we fight for other countries? We want to defend their borders—we're finally defending our own borders, and we're showing compassion for the struggling American workers who are now starting to see the light, because plants are coming pouring back into our country. And by the way, we're doing a lot of good work on that. But a lot of people are coming back in. We have Foxconn; they make the iPhones, as you know, for Apple. And so many companies are building now in our country, including the auto companies who are coming back. Years of uncontrolled immigration have placed enormous pressure on the jobs and wages of working families, and they've put great burdens on local schools and hospitals. While this may be good for a handful of special interests, it's unfair to working people of all backgrounds, all throughout our country. We want every American community to succeed, including our immigrant communities, but they can't do that if we don't control our borders.

But during that visit, I heard firsthand from the frontline agents about the security threats they confront each and every day, and I pledge my continued resolve to them—and all of you—to keep our country safe. All around the Nation, I have spent time with the wonderful Americans whose children were killed for the simple reason that our Government failed to enforce our immigration laws, already existing laws. And I promised these families, the deaths of their loved ones will not have been in vain. I promised them. I know so many of them.

And that wall is also going to help us, very importantly, with the drug problem and the massive amounts of drugs that are pouring across the southern border. My administration will never back down in demanding immigration control. The American people voted for immigration control. That's one of the reasons I'm here. And that is what the American people deserve, and they're going to get it. So you put pressure. But believe me, one way or the other, we're going to get that wall.

For generations now, the American Legion has taught our young people the principles of "Americanism." You emphasize the need to preserve the Nation's cultural, moral, and patriotic values. You encourage the observation of patriotic holidays. You stress the need to enforce our laws, including our immigration laws. You teach the responsibilities of citizenship and the importance of the Pledge of Allegiance. [Applause] True. So important. And you do it all, as your motto says, "for God and country." That's why we're here today: for America and for God. But to fulfill our patriotic duties, we must take care of our great veterans. One year ago at this gathering—and I remember so many of you so well—I promised you that I would make it my priority to fix the broken VA and deliver our veterans the care they so richly deserve. And you see what's been happening.

He's done a great job for the people of Arizona. He's very strong on borders, very strong on illegal immigration. He is loved in Arizona. I thought he was treated unbelievably unfairly when they came down with their big decision to go get him right before the election voting started, as you know. And he lost in a fairly close election. He would have won the election, but they just hammered him just before the election. I thought that was a very, very unfair thing to do.

We also understand that immigration security is a national—it's really a national treasure, but it's a national security. We need national security for safety. We're going to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. Sorry. Sorry. Call up some of the other countries in the world, say, "How you doing, folks?" Not so good.
We're creating an immigration system that puts American workers and American families first. We're moving quickly to pass a massive tax cut and simplification for the middle class. We want new tax returns. We want simplification. We want reform. And you know what we really want? We want massive tax cuts. That's what we're doing for business. That's what we're doing for the middle class.
Insurers are fleeing. Doctors are quitting. Choices are disappearing. Congress must do its job by ending the Obamacare nightmare. So, so, to deliver for American families, we are also working to pass the RAISE Act, legislation that would end chain migration and switch our country to a merit-based immigration system. Merit, merit, merit. People that will help our country. People that will help our country.
We have Tom Cotton. We have David Perdue. Two great Senators. And they're working on it. The RAISE Act would keep new immigrations from going on welfare for 5 years.
The President. Isn't that nice? They don't walk over and say, I'm going on welfare. Isn't that nice? Maybe keep them from ever going on welfare. And would require them to support themselves and their families financially. It's time to create an immigration system that serves the interests of the United States of America.
The President. Well, they say he came in through that program, so we'll see. We're looking at it. But they say he came in. I don't want—I want—look, it's very simple. What we are demanding is merit-based immigration. We want people that are going to help our country. We want people that are going to keep our country safe.

And over the profound objections of the American people, our politicians left our borders wide open. Millions of immigrants entered illegally. Millions more were admitted into our country without the proper vetting needed to protect our security and our economy. Leaders in Washington imposed on the country an immigration policy that Americans never voted for, never asked for, and never approved, a policy where the wrong people are allowed into our country and the right people are rejected. American citizens, as usual, have been left to bear the cost and to pick up the tab.

We are here today to advance bipartisan immigration reform that serves the needs of the American families, workers, and taxpayers. It's DACA. We've been talking about DACA for a long time. I've been hearing about it for years, long before I decided to go into this particular line of work. And maybe we can do something.

So, in order to secure it, we need a wall. We need closing enforcement—we have to close enforcement loopholes. Give immigration officers—and these are tremendous people, the border security agents, the ICE agents—we have to give them the equipment they need, we have to close loopholes. And this really does include a very strong amount of different things for border security.

Rep. Hoyer. What happened, Mr. President, I think, is that the Senate passed a comprehensive immigration bill, as you know. We did not consider it in the House, so we didn't reach those issues.

Very frankly, on border security, Mr. McCaul, the chairman of the committee, reported out a unanimous security solution, which we then included in the bill that we filed on comprehensive immigration reform. So I think we can reach agreement.

The President. Well, I also think that, after we do DACA—and I really believe we should be able to be successful—I really think we should look in terms of your permanent solution and to the whole situation with immigration. I think a lot of people in this room would agree to that also, but we'll do it in steps. And most people agree with that, I think, Dick. We'll do the steps. Even you say, "Let's do this, and then we go phase two."

The one thing I don't want to have happen here is what I saw in the past. There were four bills that were passed on border security years ago that never got finished. There were immigration bills passed that—we're right back at the table with the same problem. Let's make a commitment to each one, and most importantly, to the American people, that, when we get done and come to an agreement, that we're not back at this problem 3, 4 years from now.

The President. I would like to add the words "merit" into any bill that's submitted because I think we should have merit-based immigration like they have in Canada, like they have in Australia. So we have people coming in that have a great track record, as opposed to what we're doing now, to be honest with you.

[Senator Perdue made brief remarks, concluding as follows.] But limiting this to the legal immigration side and combining the balance between various solutions on DACA; DREAMers, if it gets in the conversation; as well border security and chain migration, I think therein lies the balance of a good deal that can be done.

The President. Thank you, Lindsey. You know, it's very interesting, because I do have people that are—let's just to use a very common term—very far right and very far left. They're very unhappy about what we're doing, but I really don't believe they have to be, because I really think this sells itself. And you know, when you talk about comprehensive immigration reform, which is where I would like to get to eventually—if we do the right bill here, we are not very far way. You know, we've done most of it. If you want to know the truth, Dick? If we do this properly, DACA, you're not so far away from comprehensive immigration reform.

Rep. Hoyer. Mr. President, many of the things that are mentioned ought to be a part of the negotiations regarding comprehensive immigration reform.

Participant. We're not talking about comprehensive immigration.

Senator Dianne G. Feinstein. I would. As you know, we tried for comprehensive immigration reform in the Senate. It was on the floor, there were a number of amendments, it got a lot of attention in the Judiciary Committee, and then the House didn't take it up.

Sen. Feinstein. Well, I think if we have some meaningful comprehensive immigration reform, that's really where the security goes.

So I think, yes, we can make this happen. We all know it. We've done it before. You and I spent a long time—we did probably one of the most difficult things to do in California: water. And I believe we can get there, and we can just keep working each day on this. The President. I think what we're all saying is we'll do DACA and we can certainly start comprehensive immigration reform the following afternoon. Okay? We'll take an hour off, and then we'll start.

Sen. Perdue. In my opinion, we'll be right back here either 5 years, 30 years, whatever. But this, the chain migration, is so insidious; it is the fundamental flaw in the immigration policy of the United States. If any conversation about DACA is being held without that consideration—I agree with border security as well—but any conversation about that is not going to go anywhere in the United States Senate. And if we think we're going to divide one side versus the other, that's just not going to happen on this issue.

Sen. Perdue. Seventy percent of Americans want the immigration policy to be, the family—the nuclear family and the workers. Seventy percent.

The President. David, the chain immigration, though, has taken a very big hit in the last year with what's happening. I mean, you're looking at these killers—whether you like or not—we're looking at these killers, and then you see, 18 people came in, 22 people came in, 30 people came in, with this one person that just killed a lot of people. I really don't believe there are a lot of Democrats saying, "We're going to be supporting chain migration," anymore.

The President. That's okay. So I think that's why we make it a phase two. We do a phase one, which is DACA and security, and we do phase two, which is comprehensive immigration. And I think we should go right to it, I really do. We do one, and we then do the other. But we go right to it.

Sen. Hirono. And as the only immigrant serving in the United States Senate right now, I would like nothing better than for us to get to comprehensive immigration reform. But what I'm hearing around the table right now is a commitment to resolving the DACA situation, because there is a sense of urgency.

President Trump. No. It's got to include the wall. We need the wall for security. We need the wall for safety. We need the wall for stopping the drugs from pouring in. I would imagine that the people in the room, both Democrat and Republican, I really believe they're going to come up with a solution to the DACA problem—which has been going on for a long time—and maybe, beyond that, immigration as a whole.

Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of American workers and American families. For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our most vulnerable communities. They've allowed millions of low-wage workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans. Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.

While we cannot imagine the depths of that kind of sorrow, we can make sure that other families never have to endure this kind of pain. Tonight I am calling on Congress to finally close the deadly loopholes that have allowed MS-13 and other criminal gangs to break into our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our immigration laws and support our ICE and Border Patrol agents—these are great people; these are great, great people—that work so hard in the midst of such danger so that this can never happen again.

Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an immigration reform package. In recent months, my administration has met extensively with both Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration reform. Based on these discussions, we presented Congress with a detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair compromise, one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our country gets the critical reforms it needs and must have.

The third pillar ends the visa lottery, a program that randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of American people. It's time to begin moving toward a merit-based immigration system, one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our country.

In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these programs present risks we can just no longer afford. It's time to reform these outdated immigration rules and finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century. These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise and one that will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system. For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen. Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that fulfills my ironclad pledge to sign a bill that puts America first. So let's come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job done.

We can deliver for our police, our veterans, and our brave servicemembers. And finally, after decades of waiting, we can finally pass immigration reform that protects our country, defends our borders, and modernizes our immigration rules to serve the needs of American workers and of American families. So important.

We want an immigration policy that's fair, equitable, but that's going to protect our people. We want people coming into our country based on merit and based on the fact that they are going to love our country, and they respect our people and our country. We don't want visa lottery. Pick a lottery ticket. Pick a lottery. We don't want that. So we want it based on merit.

We have a chance now to pass into law the immigration reforms that the American people have been demanding for decades and that many of you have been working on for your entire careers. We have a great opportunity as a Republican Party. As the Republican Party, we have a great opportunity. We're getting very little help from the Democrats, but I hope after I leave this room, we're going to get a call from these people saying, "Let's go."

As you know, I have put forward an immigration framework based on many months of meeting and working with Tom Cotton and working with John Cornyn, who was in the office the other day, and David Perdue—incredible people—and Bob Goodlatte, who's out here someplace. Really incredible people. And it's a strong bill, but it's a very fair bill. And it protects our borders. We have to protect our borders.

It includes reforms that are overwhelmingly popular with the voters, including Democrats. The Democrats want to have—the real Democrats, they want to have their borders protected. But it includes Democrats, Independents, Republicans. Americans want an immigration system that works for everybody. And they want safety.

Nearly 7 in 10 Americans support an immigration reform package that includes a permanent solution on DACA. I mean, I've been hearing about DACA for so many years. Some people call it DREAMers. It's not DREAMers. Don't fall into that trap. It's just much different than DREAMers. And I said the other night, you know, we have dreamers too. We have dreamers in this country too. You can't forget our dreamers. I have a lot of dreamers here.

We want something that is very, very tough and strong, in terms of the border. We need to end chain migration, and we need to cancel the terrible visa lottery. And those are the four pillars that I talked about the other night. We call them the White House framework, a plan that will finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century.

The Republican position on immigration is the center, mainstream view of the American people, with some extra strength at the border and security at the border added in. What we're asking for and what the American people are pleading for is sanity and common sense in our immigration system. We want immigration rules that protect our communities, defend our security, and admit people who will love our country and contribute to our society.

But make no mistake: I will not rest until we have delivered for the citizens of our great country so many different things—immigration, the strong military. We've done an awfully good job of protecting our Second Amendment. That was in question during the campaign, you remember, and we have done a very, very good job.

But we have a pool of a hundred million people, a lot of whom want to work. We will also have a much more merit-based immigration policy, where we're going to bring in people that are going to be great workers, and they'll really fill up Foxconn and all of the places. Like, I was very instrumental in getting you Foxconn, as you know, and—through my friendships with that great company. And they're going to Wisconsin; it's going to be incredible. They're going to employ tremendous numbers of people. They're going to build one of the biggest plants in the world. So it's going to be very exciting.

Sen. Johnson. So I'm hoping, as part of this bipartisan process, that we actually fix our horribly broken legal immigration system so we do have the workers, and it has to be merit-based. So I ask my Democratic colleagues, please work with us, let's fix the DREAMer problem, but let's also fix our horribly broken legal immigration system. The President. Good. Thank you, Ron.

Now, they don't like guns. You know why? They're not painful enough. These are animals. They cut people. They cut them. They cut them up in little pieces, and they want them to suffer. And we take them into our country, because our immigration laws are so bad. And when we catch them—it's called catch-and-release. We have to, by law, catch them and then release them. Catch-and-release. And I can't get the Democrats—and nobody has been able to for years—to approve commonsense measures that, when we catch these animal-killers, we can lock them up and throw away the keys.

Now, this was a rock-and-roll song—little amendments—a rock-and-roll song. But every time I do it, people—and you have to think of this in terms of immigration. We have to have great people come into our—I want people to come into our country. And I want people that are going to help us. And I don't want people that are going to come in and be accepting all of the gifts of our country for the next 50 years and do—and contribute nothing. I don't want that, and you don't want that.

So this is called "The Snake." And think of it in terms of immigration. And you may love it, or you may say, isn't that terrible. Okay? And if you say, isn't that terrible, who cares? Because the way they treat me—that's peanuts compared to the way they treat me. Okay? [Laughter] Immigration.

Lastly, and very importantly, we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place. We don't want them in our country.
Decades of record immigration have produced lower wages and higher unemployment for our citizens, especially for African-American and Latino workers. We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.
We are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration, to stop the gangs and the violence, and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities. I have been honored to receive the endorsement of America's Border Patrol Agents, and will work directly with them to protect the integrity of our lawful, lawful, lawful immigration system. Lawful.
Tonight, I want every American whose demands for immigration security have been denied – and every politician who has denied them – to listen very very closely to the words I am about to say.
My plan is the exact opposite of the radical and dangerous immigration policy of Hillary Clinton. Americans want relief from uncontrolled immigration. Communities want relief.
Yet Hillary Clinton is proposing mass amnesty, mass immigration, and mass lawlessness. Her plan will overwhelm your schools and hospitals, further reduce your jobs and wages, and make it harder for recent immigrants to escape the tremendous cycle of poverty that they're going through right now and make it almost impossible to join the middle class.
Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.
We have a full agenda, unlike a lot of other meetings that happen of this general type. We're going to cover some of the immigration things. We're going to cover regulatory relief. We're going to cover tax and trade, women in the workplace, infrastructure, and education. And in each of those areas, we'll get suggestions, ways to make things happen, happen faster to improve the country.

You want low-cost American energy also, which means lifting the American restrictions on oil, on shale, on natural gas, and on clean, very clean coal. We're going to put the miners back to work. The miners go back to work. You want us to enforce our immigration laws and to defend our borders. You want fair trade deals and a level playing field. We don't have a level playing field. Because you understand that when American workers win, America as a country wins and wins big. And every country over the last long period of time has been taking advantage of the stupidity of our politicians. It's not going to happen any longer.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security. By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone. We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos. We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

Switching away from this current system of lower skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families—including immigrant families—enter the middle class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy, indeed.

Secondly, we are going to enforce the "hire American" rules that are designed to protect jobs and wages of workers in the United States. We believe jobs must be offered to American workers first. Does that make sense? Right now widespread abuse in our immigration system is allowing American workers of all backgrounds to be replaced by workers brought in from other countries to fill the same job for sometimes less pay. This will stop. American workers have long called for reforms to end these visa abuses. And today, their calls are being answered for the first time. That includes taking the first steps to set in motion a long-overdue reform of H-1B visas.

Perhaps in no area have past Governments sold out special interests and foreign lobbyists more than on the issue of immigration. Year after year, you pleaded for Washington to enforce our laws as illegal immigration surged, refugees flooded in, and lax vetting threatened your family's safety and security.

In just 100 days, we have taken historic steps to secure our border, impose needed immigration control like you've never seen before—is that true?—and properly screen and vet those seeking admission into our country. They are going to come in because they love our country. We're not taking them otherwise.

We are operating on a very simple principle: that our immigration system should put the needs of American workers, American families, American companies, and American citizens first. I appointed a great military general, John Kelly, to lead the Department of Homeland Security.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

And we're achieving these goals by eliminating these job-killing regulations, unlocking American energy, rebuilding our military, pursuing fair and reciprocal trade deals, achieving massive reductions in illegal immigration, transforming the Department of Veterans Affairs, and building a new partnership among nations to defeat terrorism, which we have to do.

Secretary of Homeland Security John F. Kelly. Mr. President, proud to be here. Certainly very proud to represent the quarter of a million men and women that serve the country in DHS. In the 5 months that I've been in the job, we have gone a long way to facilitate the—improve the legal movement of people and commerce across our borders and, yet at the same time, have gone a long way to safeguarding our borders, particularly the southern border, working with all of our partners to the South. A 70-percent drop in illegal immigration. While we still welcome legal immigrants to the tune of over a million a year, we are no longer a friendly environment for illegal border crosses.

The President. Since I took office, we have cut illegal immigration on our southern border by record numbers—78 percent.

As we speak, we are working with two wonderful Senators, Tom Cotton and David Perdue, to create a new immigration system for America. Instead of today's low-skill system—just a terrible system where anybody comes in; people that have never worked, people that are criminals—anybody comes in. We want a merit-based system: one that protects our workers, our taxpayers, and one that protects our economy.

Before we begin, I want to make a very brief announcement. I had an excellent meeting today with Chairman Grassley and other lawmakers on immigration reform. Following the terrorist attack in New York, I'm calling on Congress to immediately terminate the Diversity Visa Lottery Program. It's a disaster for our country.
That's why I recently withdrew the United States from the United Nations plan for global governance of immigration and refugee policy. No borders. It's a no-borders plan. They have a plan: no borders. I heard about it recently. I said, what are you talking about "no borders"? No borders? No borders. Everybody can come in. If you don't mind, I've rejected that plan. Is that okay? [Applause] Okay?

We've also begun the process of building the wall on the southern border. And we are empowering our immigration officers to do their job, and they're doing a great job. ICE and Border Patrol agents are working so hard, and they endorsed us for the election. I say "us" because it's really not me. It's us, all together. It's us. It's us. We're a group—a big group—a big, beautiful group. I'll tell—all you have to do is look around here.

It's time for Congress to adopt a pro-American immigration agenda. Every Member of Congress should be asked where they stand on these issues: blocking funds to sanctuary cities. I don't want to give sanctuary cities money. Passing Kate's Law to put repeat offenders behind bars for a long period of time. Increasing the number of ICE officers, who are fantastic, and Border Patrol officers, so we can dismantle vile criminal gangs, like, as I said, MS-13 animals. Ensuring that new immigrants to our country are financially self-sufficient and will not be on welfare the day they come in. And as I said, ending chain migration. We want a system that is merit based; they come in on merit. They don't come in—a lottery system. How about the lottery system, folks? You see that?

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

We are here today to advance bipartisan immigration reform that serves the needs of the American families, workers, and taxpayers. It's DACA. We've been talking about DACA for a long time. I've been hearing about it for years, long before I decided to go into this particular line of work. And maybe we can do something.

So, in order to secure it, we need a wall. We need closing enforcement—we have to close enforcement loopholes. Give immigration officers—and these are tremendous people, the border security agents, the ICE agents—we have to give them the equipment they need, we have to close loopholes. And this really does include a very strong amount of different things for border security.

Rep. Hoyer. What happened, Mr. President, I think, is that the Senate passed a comprehensive immigration bill, as you know. We did not consider it in the House, so we didn't reach those issues.

Very frankly, on border security, Mr. McCaul, the chairman of the committee, reported out a unanimous security solution, which we then included in the bill that we filed on comprehensive immigration reform. So I think we can reach agreement.

The President. Well, I also think that, after we do DACA—and I really believe we should be able to be successful—I really think we should look in terms of your permanent solution and to the whole situation with immigration. I think a lot of people in this room would agree to that also, but we'll do it in steps. And most people agree with that, I think, Dick. We'll do the steps. Even you say, "Let's do this, and then we go phase two."

The one thing I don't want to have happen here is what I saw in the past. There were four bills that were passed on border security years ago that never got finished. There were immigration bills passed that—we're right back at the table with the same problem. Let's make a commitment to each one, and most importantly, to the American people, that, when we get done and come to an agreement, that we're not back at this problem 3, 4 years from now.

The President. I would like to add the words "merit" into any bill that's submitted because I think we should have merit-based immigration like they have in Canada, like they have in Australia. So we have people coming in that have a great track record, as opposed to what we're doing now, to be honest with you.

[Senator Perdue made brief remarks, concluding as follows.] But limiting this to the legal immigration side and combining the balance between various solutions on DACA; DREAMers, if it gets in the conversation; as well border security and chain migration, I think therein lies the balance of a good deal that can be done.

The President. Thank you, Lindsey. You know, it's very interesting, because I do have people that are—let's just to use a very common term—very far right and very far left. They're very unhappy about what we're doing, but I really don't believe they have to be, because I really think this sells itself. And you know, when you talk about comprehensive immigration reform, which is where I would like to get to eventually—if we do the right bill here, we are not very far way. You know, we've done most of it. If you want to know the truth, Dick? If we do this properly, DACA, you're not so far away from comprehensive immigration reform.

Rep. Hoyer. Mr. President, many of the things that are mentioned ought to be a part of the negotiations regarding comprehensive immigration reform.

Participant. We're not talking about comprehensive immigration.

Senator Dianne G. Feinstein. I would. As you know, we tried for comprehensive immigration reform in the Senate. It was on the floor, there were a number of amendments, it got a lot of attention in the Judiciary Committee, and then the House didn't take it up.

Sen. Feinstein. Well, I think if we have some meaningful comprehensive immigration reform, that's really where the security goes.

So I think, yes, we can make this happen. We all know it. We've done it before. You and I spent a long time—we did probably one of the most difficult things to do in California: water. And I believe we can get there, and we can just keep working each day on this. The President. I think what we're all saying is we'll do DACA and we can certainly start comprehensive immigration reform the following afternoon. Okay? We'll take an hour off, and then we'll start.

Sen. Perdue. In my opinion, we'll be right back here either 5 years, 30 years, whatever. But this, the chain migration, is so insidious; it is the fundamental flaw in the immigration policy of the United States. If any conversation about DACA is being held without that consideration—I agree with border security as well—but any conversation about that is not going to go anywhere in the United States Senate. And if we think we're going to divide one side versus the other, that's just not going to happen on this issue.

Sen. Perdue. Seventy percent of Americans want the immigration policy to be, the family—the nuclear family and the workers. Seventy percent.

The President. David, the chain immigration, though, has taken a very big hit in the last year with what's happening. I mean, you're looking at these killers—whether you like or not—we're looking at these killers, and then you see, 18 people came in, 22 people came in, 30 people came in, with this one person that just killed a lot of people. I really don't believe there are a lot of Democrats saying, "We're going to be supporting chain migration," anymore.

The President. That's okay. So I think that's why we make it a phase two. We do a phase one, which is DACA and security, and we do phase two, which is comprehensive immigration. And I think we should go right to it, I really do. We do one, and we then do the other. But we go right to it.

Sen. Hirono. And as the only immigrant serving in the United States Senate right now, I would like nothing better than for us to get to comprehensive immigration reform. But what I'm hearing around the table right now is a commitment to resolving the DACA situation, because there is a sense of urgency.

Representative Ronald D. DeSantis. Well, Mr. President, you're tough on borders, everyone knows that. And when you think about the illegal immigration, which is obviously part of it—but this, this is why I think people elected you, because they knew that you were going to take this drug scourge seriously. It's taking a lot of American lives.

The President: We're going to see. If we make the right deal. I think they will. These are people that have very strong opinions on DACA and on immigration generally. And I happen to think they're largely right. Look, we're going to try and make a deal on DACA. We have a good chance of making it. What we need is we need the wall, we need security, we need security at the border. We have to stop the drugs from coming in. We need safety and we need a strong military.

Kernen: Well, we're going to have to end it there. I'm just — last question. Will we have another shutdown? Will you move more to the center on immigration ...

Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of American workers and American families. For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our most vulnerable communities. They've allowed millions of low-wage workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans. Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.

While we cannot imagine the depths of that kind of sorrow, we can make sure that other families never have to endure this kind of pain. Tonight I am calling on Congress to finally close the deadly loopholes that have allowed MS-13 and other criminal gangs to break into our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our immigration laws and support our ICE and Border Patrol agents—these are great people; these are great, great people—that work so hard in the midst of such danger so that this can never happen again.

Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an immigration reform package. In recent months, my administration has met extensively with both Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration reform. Based on these discussions, we presented Congress with a detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair compromise, one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our country gets the critical reforms it needs and must have.

The third pillar ends the visa lottery, a program that randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of American people. It's time to begin moving toward a merit-based immigration system, one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our country.

In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these programs present risks we can just no longer afford. It's time to reform these outdated immigration rules and finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century. These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise and one that will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system. For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen. Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that fulfills my ironclad pledge to sign a bill that puts America first. So let's come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job done.

But we have to get immigration laws that allow us to do what we have to be able to do. They are so soft. No country in the world has immigration laws so soft like we do. So that's also a part of it.
But what they're doing is disgraceful. What they are doing—Schumer and the group—what they are doing is disgraceful. And what they're doing to the wall and immigration is disgraceful. And you just take a look at the border. Okay? You take a look. Take a look at what's happening. My administration and conservatives in Congress were elected to uphold your rights, to rebuild our military—which we are doing a great job of rebuilding——to restore our prosperity, to secure our communities, and defend our borders.

Oh, we have the worst immigration laws anywhere in the world. But I'll tell you what—it's not easy for people to come in. I will tell you, it's not. But we have the worst laws. After years of defending the borders of other counties—we go into wars with other countries; we shouldn't be there. We go into wars to defend their borders; we don't defend our own borders. And we're going to start defending our country. We're going to start defending our borders.

Illegal immigration must end. Illegal immigration must end. We are going to have strong borders. I will tell you, we have maxed out every law. We are going to have truly strong—and we're going to take people into our country, but they're going to come in based on merit, not based on picking somebody out of a bin.

We are not going to let our country be overwhelmed. And we're going to demand Congress secure the border in the upcoming CR. It's going to be very soon. Going to be very soon. In recent months, Democratic lawmakers have voted against legislation to close deadly immigration loopholes, like catch-and-release. How about that one? "We caught him. Oh, release him. Bye-Bye." [Laughter] Welcome to America. Welcome to America. That's what we have.

And that's already—we have the worst immigration laws in the history of mankind. We're slowly getting them changed. We want to make it quick. So give me some reinforcements please. OK? [applause] 
So we're building the wall but we're—we're getting it all done. We're going to get rid of catch and release. We're going to get rid of—we're going to get rid of the lottery system. We're going to go eventually—when I get the votes. I need Republicans. We're going to go eventually to a merit-based system of immigration. Merit. You come in on merit. [applause] 
And immigration is down much, but we need border wall. We need—we got to have a change in our laws. Our laws are the worst laws of any country anywhere in the world—catch and release. Did you ever hear?
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
Before going any further today, I want to take a moment to address something you've been reading a lot about: the illegal immigration crisis on our southern border. It's been going on for many, many decades and many years. And it has its ups and its downs. And all we need is good legislation, and we can have it taken care of. And we have to get the Democrats to go ahead and work with us. Because as a result of Democrat-supported loopholes in our Federal laws, most illegal immigrant families and minors from Central America who arrive unlawfully at the border cannot be detained together or removed together, only released.

And you ought to see the hearings that are right now on television, but that folks are being—you know, they're going on to the mainstream, fake news media. They want to focus on immigration because they want to keep the cameras away from the hearings, because those hearings are not good for them. In fact, they're a disaster for them. The whole thing is a scam. It's a scam. And what's happened is a disgrace. So we have a House that's getting ready to finalize an immigration package that they're going to brief me on later and that I'm going to make changes to. We have one chance to get it right. We might as well get it right, or let's just keep it going. But let's do it right. We have a chance. We want to solve this problem. We want to solve family separation. I don't want children taken away from parents. And when you prosecute the parents for coming in illegally, which should happen, you have to take the children away. Now, we don't have to prosecute them. But then, we're not prosecuting them for coming in illegally. That's not good.

So the military is taken care of. We want to have a very strong border. As you know, I signed an Executive order this morning letting families stay together. The laws are horrible. We have the weakest, most pathetic immigration laws anywhere in the world. Nobody has laws like we do.

Mexico—which makes over a hundred billion dollars a year with us—but we're changing that—Mexico, with the NAFTA deal, makes a fortune. They have very powerful immigration laws. They could stop the immigration on the spot, but they choose not to do it. I made them do it with respect to the caravan from 3 weeks ago, where 2,000 people started and about 100 people got through. But they could stop. They make—they have a 2,000-mile journey up Mexico. Mexico doesn't stop the people. Well, we're not going to put up with it, and I'm going to make it a part of NAFTA that they have to.

And you will—you've seen a big difference already in Minnesota. Tremendous difference. A lot of things have happened. Incredible things have happened having to do with immigration in Minnesota since we got in.

The President. Because she doesn't like what she was seeing, and I don't like what we were seeing, and we have to get together and do something on immigration. And as you folks know better than anybody, that has to take place very quickly. But she's there, and you've worked very closely with her.

The President. That's all we need. Border security. We've got to get going. A lot of bad things are happening, and I think we're doing it incredibly well. We have no tools. We have bad laws. We have the worst immigration laws in the history of the world, okay? So it's a joke. People can't believe it. Other countries look at us, and they say, "How is that possible?" Somebody touches our land, we now take them to a court, to a judge. They want us to choose 5,000 judges. How do you choose 5,000 judges? Can you imagine the corruption just from a normal standpoint? Just common sense. Can you imagine the corruption?

Go to the barbershop. Grab somebody. Make them a judge. Everybody is being made a judge. They want 5,000 judges more. It's crazy. Other countries, it's called: "I'm sorry. You can't come in. You have to leave." This one, we have judges. If they step on our land, we have judges. It's insane. So we're going to have to change our whole immigration policy.

We inherited a lot of different things, but of all of them, immigration is—makes the least sense. It is a hodgepodge of laws that have been put together over years. And we have to change it. It's so simple. It's called: "I'm sorry, you can't come in. You have to go in through a legal process." You don't have to see a judge where the judge is going to take 3 years before you can come back. In the meantime, you never come back, because you're already in the country. You're someplace in the country. And that would be bad, but it's really bad when it's a criminal.

And we have plenty of them coming into the country this way. And they use the children. They use these young children for their own benefit. So we have to change the whole immigration picture. And we'll be able to do it. We need the border wall. We need the border. We need border security, and we need modern equipment. And we'll get it done, I have no doubt.

So we need people to really be able to take these jobs. That will have a positive impact, even on immigration. We need people to come in on a merit basis, because we have to be able to provide jobs. We have to be able to provide the people that are running these massive companies with labor. So tomorrow I'll be making a big announcement about workforce training initiatives, which aims to give every American citizen an opportunity to achieve their American Dream. I want to have choice, just like we have now with the veterans, all approved, which nobody thought would be possible. The vets now, instead of standing on line for 2 weeks or 1 week or 3 months, they can go out and see a doctor, and we pay for it, and it turns out to be much less expensive. And they are loving it. Nobody thought it was possible to get that.

We can make our state without peer for economic opportunity if we continue with strong Conservative policies. We can fight illegal immigration. [applause]
These are the people who lost trillions of dollars overseas and who gave us our horrible immigration laws. These laws are the worst. I am for America first and the American worker. We want to be a puppet for no one any longer. We're not going to be a puppet any longer. [applause]
We want to--we want to take care of our vets. We want to honor our military. We want to secure our borders. We want to put an end to illegal immigration once and for all. [applause]
The President. Could you say something that, despite the horrible immigration laws that we have to live with—with catch-and-release and all of the horror show—it's a horror show. It's a disgrace, frankly. We'll get it changed.

And so we are very, very tough at the border. We're setting records despite horrible, horrible immigration laws that the Democrats do not want to fix, and I think that's going to hurt them very badly at the polls come November. That's my opinion.

Democrat immigration policies are destroying innocent lives and spilling very innocent blood. We believe that any party that puts criminal aliens before American citizens should be voted out of office, not into office. Nobody says it. Nobody says it.
Republicans stand for stopping illegal immigration. . . [applause] . . . fixing bad, horrible, obsolete trade deals, unleashing American energy, cutting taxes, supporting our militaries and our great vets, our great, great vets. . . [applause]
We're doing a great job. And we have really no laws to work with. We have really no laws to work with. The laws are horrible. Laws are the worst and dumbest in the history of the world. Again, between the trade deals, world, and our immigration horrible laws in the world, but we're getting them out.
The President. Thank you very much, Jerry. And that is true. We have so many companies coming back to our country, which nobody thought was going to happen. And they want to be where the action is. And we're going to—I can tell you, we're going to start looking at, very seriously, merit-based immigration. We have to do it, because we need people. We need people to run these great companies that are coming in.

Republicans stand for stopping illegal immigration, fixing horrible trade deals, cutting your taxes in a major, major way, biggest tax cut in the history of our country. And in addition to that, we've got ANWR. You know what that is, right, in Alaska? They've been trying to get that approved for 50 years. We got it approved. It's part of that plan.
The Democrats would bankrupt the safety net through totally unlimited and uncontrolled immigration. You will see crime like you've never, ever seen before. The policies of their party aren't just extreme. Frankly, they're dangerous, and they're crazy.
Democrats want to abolish us. In other words, they want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely, let violent sadistic gangs, like MS-13--the worst gang in the world--run wild in our communities.
And we do. We want to protect benefits and public benefits for truly needy Americans, Americans that need help. Democrats want to abolish ICE. In other words, they want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely. And the Democrat Party supports sanctuary cities that unleash violent predators, like MS-13, into our communities.
Every day, innocent lives are stolen because of Democrat-supported immigrant policies. If you just take a look, you have immigration policies that are so bad, so dangerous. Just recently in California, an illegal alien with a sex crime conviction and other convictions had a prior deportation. They wanted to deport this person. They never did. He was convicted for killing a local football coach who leaves behind a wife and six beautiful kids. A pillar of the community. By the way, this is all over. You could go--you could do this for days.
All because of the illegal immigration onslaught brought by the Democrats, because they refuse to acknowledge or to change the laws. They like it. They also figure everybody coming in is going to vote Democrat. You know. Hey, they're not so stupid, when you think about it, right? But they are crazy.
And the crazy Democrats refuse to support any form of border security legislation to fix our absolutely horrible, old-fashioned, loophole-ridden immigration laws. We have the worst laws anywhere in the world. We have the dumbest laws anywhere in the world. Somebody comes in and we say, excuse me, a foot hits the ground. You know, if a foot hits the ground, we're not allowed to say, hey, go back. Every other country in the world, they say go back. Can't come in. Sorry.
And on immigration, Tester's record can be summarized in two simple words: Open borders. Open borders. Think about it. Think about it. [booing]
The Democrats don't care about what their extremist immigration agenda will do to your communities, to your hospitals, what about your hospitals? And to your schools. The Democrats don't care that a flood of illegal immigration will bankrupt our country. You saw the site. Did anybody see that bridge over the weekend? Did you see the bridge yesterday, today? I mean, is that an incredible situation? It's sad. And it's sad -- honestly, it's sad from both sides. It's sad from their side, also. We're going to figure it out. I'll be honest with you, I've already figured it out. You're going to be happy. We're going to make a lot of people happy. We're going to make a lot of people happy. Think I'll keep it a little bit low key until the election. I like where we stand in the election. You know, I think that blue wave is being rapidly shattered. [applause]
Nice man. The casualties in the Democrats' open borders crusade are really a lot. Far more than anybody would know, of innocent American families and lives. Democrat immigration policies allow poisonous drugs and MS-13 killers to pour into our country. These are not people that you don't want to have ICE around. ICE goes into these nests, you know, they're nests, MS-13. They call them a nest. They go into the nest like ho-hum, it's a day in the office. You understand. Because I'm telling you, you guys, even the tough guys here, you don't want to do it. You don't want to do it. She's done it, she said. If you did it, you didn't do it by choice. Ah, she said, no, I didn't. What's this story all about? I want to find out about this story. Come on up here -- no, I'm kidding.
The Democrats don't care what their extremist immigration agenda will do to your neighborhoods, to your hospitals, or to your schools. They don't care that the mass illegal immigration will totally bankrupt our country, because all the Democrats care about is regaining power, no matter how they have to go about doing it. All the witch hunts, no matter what they do, they just want to gain power. But we're not going to let them gain power. [booing]
Democrat immigration policies allow poisonous drugs and MS-13 to pour into our country. And Democrat sanctuary cities release violent criminals from jail and straight into your neighborhoods. Republicans believe our country should be a sanctuary for law-abiding Americans, not for criminal aliens. [applause]
One of the most important areas of State and Federal cooperation is public safety. In the past, and if you look at post-9/11 era, we know how capital—and how critical it is to have a seamless cooperation between all levels of law enforcement. And I want to specially thank the community leaders here today we have expressed their support for working with Federal immigration authorities. So important. So great.

And a lot of times, you're not allowed to do it, by some bad leadership in various States. You have some bad leadership, but you know what the right thing to do is. So I want to thank all of those people that work with Federal immigration authorities to remove gang members, drug dealers, and criminals from your community. Sounds like a pretty easy thing to do, I think.

My administration is also working closely with State and local leaders to save the lives of those suffering from the scourge of drug addiction, by taking historic action to confront the opioid epidemic, and also the drug epidemic. I mean, just the drug—generally—epidemic. Since last year, the totally number of opioid prescriptions has decreased by 17 percent. And we're very—working very hard on the drug problem. You see what's going on on the border. You see how bad the immigration laws are given to us—thank you very much—by the Democrats. They're the dumbest laws anywhere in the world. Dumbest immigration laws anywhere in the world. There's nothing—catch-and-release.

Republicans know that the rule of law is essential to national sovereignty. And we know that immigration enforcement is essential to public safety, national security, and the protection of American jobs, wages, and public benefits. You know that.
Illegal immigration has been especially harmful to African American communities and also to Hispanic American communities by depressing wages and replacing workers. That's been happening, and it's been very unfair. All Americans have the right to have their laws enforced and their borders protected. We don't have borders, we don't have a country. [Applause] Right?

And Mark Harris is another true fighter for North Carolina. He will vote to protect your jobs and cut regulations like never before, because that's what we're doing. He will vote to save your health care, secure our border, and stop illegal immigration. Ted and Mark, say a few words. Come on. [applause]
As we speak, the Democrat Party is openly encouraging millions of illegal aliens to break our laws, violate our borders, and bankrupt our country. That's what has to happen. Democrats' extreme immigration policies will overwhelm your schools, your hospitals, and communities, and strain public resources to the breaking point. And Democrat sanctuary cities, a term you don't love too much around here, release criminal aliens straight out of jail and right onto your streets. Congratulations.
Illegal immigration affects the lives of all Americans. Illegal immigration hurts American workers; burdens American taxpayers; and undermines public safety; and places enormous strain on local schools, hospitals, and communities in general, taking precious resources away from the poorest Americans who need them most. Illegal immigration costs our country billions and billions of dollars each year.

America is a welcoming country. And under my leadership, it's a welcoming country. We lead the world in humanitarian protection and assistance, by far. It's nobody even close. We have the largest and most expansive immigration programs anywhere on the planet.

Mass, uncontrolled immigration is especially unfair to the many wonderful, law-abiding immigrants already living here who followed the rules and waited their turn. Some have been waiting for many years. Some have been waiting for a long time. They've done everything perfectly. And they're going to come in. At some point, they're going to come in. In many cases, very soon. We need them to come in, because we have companies coming into our country; they need workers. But they have to come in on a merit basis, and they will come in on a merit basis.

This endemic abuse of the asylum system makes a mockery of our immigration system, displacing legitimate asylum seekers—and there are legitimate asylum seekers—while rewarding those who abuse or defraud our system, which is almost everybody. Everybody is abusing it and just doing things to our system which were unthinkable, I'm sure even by the Democrats who were largely responsible for getting it done.

The current influx, if not halted, threatens to overwhelm our immigration system and our communities and poses unacceptable dangers to the entire Nation. We have to have our borders. Can't let drugs come in. Not just—it's not just people. It's people; it's drugs. It's human traffickers.

The only long-term solution to the crisis, and the only way to ensure the endurance of our Nation as a sovereign country, is for Congress to overcome "open borders" obstruction. That's exactly what it is: It's "open borders" obstruction. No votes. You can come up with the greatest border plan, the greatest immigration plan; you won't get one vote from a Democrat. They have terrible policy. In many cases, they're terrible politicians. But the one thing I give them great credit for: They vote as a bloc. They stick together.

Acting Attorney General Boente. Judge Gorton, who wrote that decision, had a very good analysis where he referred to immigration law, and I thought it was a terrific opinion. And I think it's the right opinion.
Sheriff Mahoney. I want to thank you too for seeking the input and guidance of our Nation's sheriffs on issues like immigration. My community is looking for immigration reform, an expedited way for a good immigrant to obtain citizenship in this great country. And I appreciate the invitation today to join you and look forward to working with you on many of these issues. Some we'll disagree on, but far more we're going to agree on.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. President, you know we have been invited to the White House before. And we've sat at this table with the former administration. But this is totally different. Not once did the President go around the room and ask the sheriffs what were issues that were important to us, he or she, in our parts of the country, but rather, it was an outgoing message about gun control, about other things. You asked us what is important to us, whether it's mental health in the jails, opioid addiction. You hit on them right off the bat: the border, immigration, vetting. We appreciate that. That has not happened before. We've been here before, but we've never had a President to sit down and listen to what it is that we're facing representing our constituents and public safety across this country. And that's why we appreciate it. That's why we're here today with you.
The President: Because I know the British people and I understand the British people, and the British people wanted to have control over their country. And they don't want to have people coming from all over the world into Britain and they don't know anything about these people. And I said because of immigration, and to a certain extent because of trade, but mostly immigration, I said that Brexit is going to be a big upset and I was right.

Mr. Prime Minister, I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your immigration reforms and on Australia's commitment to merit-based immigration. Are my friends from Congress listening to that? Merit-based. We want to do merit-based immigration also. And we will. That really protects the interests of Australia and its people. It's the way to go, and you've been very successful with it. Here, we're working very hard to do the same. In that sense, we're going to hopefully follow in your footprints.

And immigration is down much, but we need border wall. We need—we got to have a change in our laws. Our laws are the worst laws of any country anywhere in the world—catch and release. Did you ever hear?
So Democrats have opposed every common-sense measure necessary to stop this horrendous scourge of crime, to dismantle MS-13 and to stop illegal immigration. That's why we have to go in November. You have to work with Marsha. We have to get the votes. We need the votes. They stick together. They'll always vote.
They want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely. And they want no borders. They want no borders. Let everybody just pour in to our country. [booing]
Mexico has 26,000 soldiers, right now, on the border. They have been fantastic—because of tariffs. But I don't care what it is, because Mexico—in fact, I'll be calling the President at a certain point. I just hope they keep it up. Because if the Democrats would change the laws—which I was thinking about putting together, as you know, with the gun situation. So we have immigration, and we have, let's say, some of the things we're talking about right now; you have them together.

Now, with that being said, we're starting to do very well in the Ninth Circuit. We're starting to do well all over. We won the lawsuit on the wall. We won the lawsuit on a lot of different things having to do with illegal immigration. That's why a lot of our very strong points are coming out.

And in addition to Mexico helping us, we're ending up with some great legal victories now on illegal immigration. That's one of the reasons we're doing so well.

As my administration works tirelessly to protect our borders, we face an onslaught from far-left activists who want to erase America's borders and nullify our Federal laws. We can't let that happen. This includes activist judges who have issued nationwide injunctions prohibiting us from enforcing the immigration laws enacted even by Congress. Just as just one example, Federal law authorities expedited removal for illegal aliens apprehended within 2 years of entry, but a district judge—local area—issued a ruling saying the law could only be applied to illegal aliens caught within 14 days. That's a tiny fraction of the timeframe allowed by statute. And the number of people coming in is cut to a level that's—becomes almost insignificant. And we'll win as we go up. How long will that take? A year, 2 years? These nationwide injunctions undermine our entire immigration system and other systems.

The most dangerous and shameful attacks on the rule of law comes from and in the form of sanctuary cities. Sanctuary cities order jails and prisons to release criminal illegal aliens—people that have committed the worst crimes—directly back onto city streets, instead of safely turning them over to Federal immigration authorities and ICE so they can be incarcerated or tried or—what I like to do best is—get them the hell out of our country and bring them home. Let them take care of them.

Limbaugh: — there have been two debates, Sir, and in both debates, your first and the vice presidential debate, there have been two areas that have never been explored, not one question asked about. One's gun control, the Second Amendment. The other's immigration.
The President: That's right. They don't talk about immigration, and we have immigration down really good. In fact, I was gonna do an immigration bill — I have it all done — and then my guys said, "Why bring it up, Sir? You have the same policies that you're already implementing, and you know, why should you go through the controversy of it?" I mean, the people that wanted the wall generally love what I've done, and immigration generally. We've got a couple hardliners out there, you know, friends of yours. [chuckle] But the people that wanted the wall — I've done far more than I thought.
Our immigration now, because it wasn't just — it was the wall, but we had to cut a lot of these crazy things out. I mean, you have chain migration where somebody comes in illegally, and we have a killer who killed eight people on the West Side Highway, ran over eight people, you know, a terrorist, jihadist, came in through the southern border, and through chain migration, the chain, he brings in his mother, his father, his grandmother, his aunts, his brothers, his uncles, he brings in all these people, and I say, "Wait a minute." What we've done is incredible on immigration. Think of it. You have killers that come in and because of chain migration they're allowed to bring other people —
Limbaugh: It never comes up in a debate. That and immigration, those two subjects never come up.
My administration is also following through on our promise to secure, protect, and defend that border within our United States. Our southern border will be protected always. It will have the wall. Drugs will stop pouring in and poisoning our youth, and that will happen very, very soon. You're already seeing what's going on. The drugs are pouring into our country, folks. They are poisoning our youth and plenty of others, and we're going to stop it. We're not going to be playing games. Not going to be playing games. Following my Executive action—and don't forget, we've only been here for like, what, 50 days?—we've already experienced an unprecedented 40-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border; 61 percent—61 percent—since Inauguration Day—61 percent. Think of that.

We're also working, night and day, to keep our Nation safe from terrorism. We have seen the devastation from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino—hundreds upon hundreds of people from outside our country have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in the United States courts. Right now we have investigations going on all over; hundreds of refugees are under Federal investigation for terrorism and related reasons. We have entire regions of the world destabilized by terrorism and ISIS. For this reason, I issued an Executive order to temporarily suspend immigration from places where it cannot safely occur.

The President. The order he blocked was a watered-version of the first order that was also blocked by another judge and should have never been blocked to start with. This new order was tailored to the dictates of the Ninth Circuit's—in my opinion—flawed ruling. This is, in the opinion of many, an unprecedented judicial overreach. The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems—or she—or she. Fortunately, it will not be Hillary she. [Applause] When he or she deems it to be in the national interest of our country——

Uncontrolled immigration -- you see what's going on there; that's happening quickly. Little problem with the courts not wanting to give us the decisions that should be given -- but we're going to win it -- and a financial system stacked against the American people.

Since the day of my election, we've already cut illegal immigration at the southern border by 61 percent. (Applause.) Sixty-one percent that we haven't started. And the courts are not making it easy, folks. They're not making it easy.

Our borders are—and our laws are a mess. Our immigration laws are a disgrace. And Mexico has some of the toughest immigration laws in the world. You can't just go into Mexico. But they allow these people to come up through Mexico and come into our country. And they know that our laws are so weak that once they get up there, it's the most ridiculous thing I've ever seen. You've seen catch-and-release. You catch them, and then you release them. Okay? [Laughter] That's what it is. Catch—this is a Democrat rule. Sherrod Brown. This is a Democrat rule. Catch-and-release. You catch them; you release them.

How did we get here? So, if you look at Jon Tester, he signed up for the Democrats' radical immigration agenda, which is "let them come in, and we believe," they say, "in sanctuary cities where they house the criminals and others." We believe in strong borders and no crime, it's very simple. Strong borders. We believe in coming into this country legally. We believe in coming in legally. [applause]
Big monster. But take a look at that. So they show an arena before the people started coming in. There were a few people, four or five hours ahead, and they apologized -- it's a disgrace. But let me just tell you, the Democrats -- we call them the Democrat party. You know why? The Democratic party sounds too good. Sounds better, doesn't it? I always hate saying, "The Democrat party." A lot of people say, "You meant to say …" Well actually, their name is the Democrat party. The Democratic party sounds too good so I don't want to use it. Okay? The new platform of the Democrat party is to abolish ICE. In other words, they want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely. That's what they want to do. [booing]
Democrats want to abolish us. In other words, they want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely, let violent sadistic gangs, like MS-13--the worst gang in the world--run wild in our communities.
They want to abolish immigration enforcement entirely. And they want no borders. They want no borders. Let everybody just pour in to our country. [booing]
And I want to give President Trump credit for something really important, it's something he and I have worked together on. We've worked for a number of things but the most important is stopping illegal immigration. [applause]
Now get this: three of those four pi -- three of those four illegal aliens that they could have arrested were pilots. So if they had made those arrests, they could have stopped 9/11 from happening. Those numbers have shaped my career. The gravity of that has never left me and I will not and I know President Trump will not allow our immigration system to be used again as a weapon to harm the American people. [applause]
And illegal immigration's an issue in this, in this campaign for governor. Did you know that my opponent Laura Kelly voted to continue allowing sanctuary cities in Kansas? [audience boos]
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
Democrat immigration policies not only drain our treasury, but they threaten our communities. Nearly 100 percent of heroin in the United States enters though the Sothern border, along with roughly 90 percent of cocaine, the majority of meth, and a substantial portion of the ultra-lethal fentanyl-killing-a-youth drug, fentanyl--the worst.
America is being respected again. We're respected as a country again. We were not respected for a long time.  [applause] We were laughed at just like these stupid immigration laws. The whole world looks at it, they laugh, they said what is this all about? A person comes into our country--another country throws them out. Hey, get out. You're not supposed to be here, you have to go through a process.
Illegal immigration costs American taxpayers more than $100 billion every single year, roughly 10 times the entire state budget of Montana. We need to use our precious resources to help Americans who follow our laws, not to reward illegal aliens who break into our country and break our laws. [applause]
Democrat immigration policies also enable drug smuggling, human trafficking and criminal cartels. Think of it: human trafficking. Do you know how bad? That's the lowest form of human being that does that. They kidnap people, many, many women. They kidnap, and they human traffic, and they're doing it in the world, worldwide. The number one—it's—it's never been worse than it is right now because of the computer, because of the Internet. It's never been like it is. Human—think of what human trafficking is. You would have thought that died out 300 years ago. It's at the highest level it's ever been now, because of the Internet, and we are fighting it hard. We're doing very well. It's horrible. [applause]
But we have a problem at the border. We have a problem with illegal immigration, and the problem is that the Democrats will not allow us to change the dumbest laws in the history of the world on immigration, because we need their votes, and we don't have their votes—or we can get more Republicans, which I'd like even better. But unless we get more Republicans, they have to change the laws, and if they don't change the laws, we're going to have the problem.
They were awfully good numbers. You know, it's very interesting. Some of the fake news was saying--I was watching: "Why doesn't he talk about the economy? Why does he talk about immigration and what's coming up with the caravan? Why does he talk about the caravan when he's got maybe the best numbers on the economy in the history of our country?" [applause]
Illegal immigration costs our country more than $100 billion every single year, and that's more than the budget of Ohio, Montana, and Wyoming combined, all places I've been. We have great races in those places. I think you're going to see some very good results.
4,000 killings and they want to abolish ICE. No thank you. And by the way, the ICE folks, they're tough and they're smart and they're great and they love our country. Just remember that. One in five Federal prisoners is a non-citizen. You don't hear that ever. Illegal immigration is also deeply unfair to American workers including African-American workers. My Administration will always protect Mississippi workers from unfair and illegal competition. A nation's first duty is to take care of it's own citizens.
Which by the way is under siege, in case you haven't noticed. Protect your Medicare and Social Security. Confirm your great judicial nominees and save our courts with incredible pro-Constitution judges. We will fight every day to secure the border, to stop illegal immigration, to pass Kate's Law. End sanctuary cities. End chain migration. Cancel the visa lottery and keep the criminals and drug dealers and terrorists the hell out of our country. [applause]
But illegal immigration hurts all Americans, including millions of legal immigrants, by driving down wages, draining public resources, and claiming countless innocent lives. You see what's going on, folks. You know what's going on. They give you all of these phony stats. They say, "Oh, it's the same. It's the same." It's not the same. It's a bad situation going on, and we've stopped it. We are taking out thousands and thousands of people from MS-13. We're bringing them the hell out of our country, thousands. [applause] But if we had proper border security, including a very powerful wall, we wouldn't have to work so hard. And it would be a lot safer and a lot better.
My Administration is committed to ending illegal immigration, while modernizing our legal immigration system, which has been in terrible shape for many, many decades, to prioritize the admission of those who can support themselves for them financially and contribute to our economy, people that come in on merit, merit, merit. [cheers and applause]
And the fact is, illegal immigration is a heartbreaking human tragedy. One in three women is sexually assaulted on the very long and dangerous journey north up to our country. Sex traffickers, these are the worst human beings on earth, exploit our porous border to sell young girls and women into modern day slavery. You wouldn't even know that nobody knows that. And by the way, do you think they come in through the ports of entry?
Both parties should come together to finally create a safe and lawful system of immigration. The American people have waited long enough. We must secure the border, pass Kate's Law. [cheers and applause] End Catch and Release, shutdown Sanctuary Cities—you know, we need Democrat votes to do that. Deport criminal aliens and keep the coyotes and traffickers and drug dealers the hell out of our country, please. [cheers and applause]
We want them to give us a little more help on the border by the way. You know Mexico has the toughest immigration laws in the world. We have the worst, because the Democrats put in things that are so bad, so bad. Catch and release. You catch 'em and then you got to release 'em. [booing] Think of it.
The mass illegal immigration across our border is a direct consequence of Democrat-supported loopholes; Democrat promises of amnesty, amnesty. [booing] You have people coming up... you know they're all met by the lawyers, the lawyers 've... And they come out. They're all met by the lawyers, and they say, "Say the following phrase: I am very afraid for my life. I am afraid for my life." Okay. And then I look at the guy, he looks like he just got out of the ring, he's a heavyweight champion of the world, he's a freyfra [sic]. It's a big fat con job, folks. It's a big fat con job.
We'll soon be taking further action to ensure that federal benefits are preserved for hardworking citizens who need them the most. We're also outlining historic pro-American Immigration Reform. It's working its way through, I must tell you, some of it's not gonna happen unless you vote for Republicans in the upcoming election, and I will tell you it's not very far away and you're gonna have great immigration laws.
Mass illegal migration reduces living standards and strains public resources. If Democrat officials had to send their children to those overcrowded, overburdened schools, they would not tolerate it for one minute. What's happening with their policies are horrible. Our immigration laws are a disgrace, and the Democrats can get together with the Republicans and solve the problem quickly. One meeting. [Applause.] 
it's time to pass Kate's law, end sanctuary cities, end catch-and-release, deport vicious gang members, which we're doing, stop human trafficking, stop illegal immigration, and establish a modern immigration system based on skills, contributions, and based on merit. We want people to come into our country based on merit. [Applause.] 
Together, we will continue unleashing the power of American enterprise, so every American can know the dignity of work and the pride of a paycheck. We will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, and lawful system of immigration. It will be a system of immigration that strengthens our country, upholds our values, and protects our way of life.
We’re replacing random migration and we’re replacing the lottery system. How about the lottery system? How about lotteries? [booing] This was Chuck Schumer. You put the name in a basket. The country puts the name in a basket and you picked people out of the lottery. Well, let’s see. This one’s a murderer. This one robbed four banks. This one, I better not say. This one, another murder. Ladies and gentlemen, another murderer. Think of this. Do you think they’re going to put their great citizens--they have great citizens; they have great people like we have great people. Do you think those people are going into a lottery? No. And then we get these people coming in and we hold it against the country. The country isn’t based on that, the country, you just take a look, look at the people they put into these lotteries. It’s a disgrace. And how we’ve done this for so many years folks, how we’ve done this. It’s an immigration system that’s totally broken and we’re going to win the House, we’re going to win the Senate, we’re going to win the presidency and we’re going to do a merit-based immigration system. Merit based. [cheers and applause]
Merit based immigration. And we need that, because we have companies coming in from all over the world, and we need good workers. We need good people. We’re down to 3.5% unemployment. We need people.  But we want people to come in based on merit, not based on some lottery put in by a government. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. [applause] We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with those four beautiful words: “Made in the USA” or “Made in America”. Either one. You can use either one. [cheers and applause] Made in America, made in the US.
We need to elect a strong Republican majority to end sanctuary cities. Stop human traffickers, stop drug smugglers, and adopt an immigration system that puts the needs of American workers and families first. [cheers and applause]
Together we will lift millions more citizens from welfare to work, depenence [sic] to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Millions and millions of people. With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause]
Together we will lift millions more from our horrible, horrible situations that have developed over the years. Look at what's happening to Democrat-run cities, every single one of them. We're going to lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. With your help, we will elect for Republicans to Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration.
So, Democrats put illegal aliens before American citizens. Republicans believe that we must take care of our own citizens first. I'm sorry. [cheers and applause] That includes millions of hardworking, lawful immigrants who waited in line, followed the rules, and came into our country legally. [cheers and applause] And among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are Hispanic-Americans who obey our laws, pay their taxes, contribute to our communities, and play by the rules, and they're the ones that wanna see something done, and we are doing it at a level that nobody else would be capable of doing it. Whether you're a first generation or a 10th generation, every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, and is always loyal to you. Your politicians have not been loyal to you. They've been loyal to themselves.
Together, we will help millions more citizens know the dignity of work, the pride of a paycheck, and the satisfaction of a job really well done. [cheers and applause] With your help, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and very lawful system of immigration. And we're going to have a lot done anyway. We already do have a lot done. You saw the figures last week, but we're doing it the hard way. It would be so much easier with a little stroke of the pen. We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with those beautiful, beautiful words, that incredible phrase, "Made in the USA." [cheers and applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years, and we've already started that program. It will happen. We have the medicine. Nobody even knew that.
With your help, we will reelect, and we will elect, a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact trade deals that ensure more products are proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." [cheers and applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer, and ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years. Nobody thought that could be done. Gonna be done. We will defend privacy, free speech, free assembly, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause] And above all, we will never stop fighting for the values that bind us together as one America. We support, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States. [cheers and applause] We stand with the incredible heroes of law enforcement. [cheers and applause] We believe in the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. [cheers and applause]
The path to victory begins with a giant win tomorrow right here in the great state of Louisiana. With your support, we will show the corrupt Democrats in Washington that the American people are not backing down. We will never ever forget. We will send a terrific new Republican governor to Baton Rouge. So tomorrow before the game, get your friends, get your family, get your neighbors and get out and vote Republican. These are two great people, vote for Ralph, vote for Eddie. Get out and vote Republican. With your help, we will lift millions more of our great citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect more Republicans to Congress to create an immigration system that protects American jobs, wages and families.
Nowhere is the Democrat betrayal of our nation more dramatic than on immigration. In recent debates, did you see these debates? Do you believe what I'm competing with? [shouting] I don't know, when I had to compete with Ted Cruz, that was brutal. He was the national debate champion, a story I've never told. I never did that before, right? I ran for office. All of a sudden, I'm supposed to be debating tomorrow night.
In fact, I just signed an executive action to protect American healthcare benefits for all American citizens. Among those hardest hit by illegal immigration are millions of legal immigrants right here in Texas, including millions of patriotic, hardworking Mexican-Americans who play by the rules, pay their taxes, follow our laws, and strengthen our communities. [cheers and applause] Whether you are a first-generation or tenth-generation, and every American citizen, and you do, you've been treated so badly. But you're not being treated badly anymore. You know? We got rid of the individual mandate from crazy Obamacare. [cheers and applause] Every American citizen deserves a government that defends your jobs, your safety, your family, your borders, and is always loyal to you for a change. We're loyal to you. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will lift millions of more citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a safe, modern, fair, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause]
The President. ... more advantages than our own citizens have, more advantages than our own military has. [booing] Jim Hood wants to raise your taxes. He supports taxpayer funding for abortion providers. [booing] He supports illegal immigration, all benefits, and he opposed our travel ban, which is so important that we won in the United States Supreme Court to keep terrorists the hell out of our country. [cheers and applause]
But with your help, we will lift millions more of our great citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. And you have great congressmen here and I'll tell you, I wanna appreciate it, fellas. Warriors, you're warriors. You are warriors. What was it, 196 for and nothing against, right? That doesn't happen with Republicans. It doesn't happen. I always complain. I always say the Democrats are lousy politicians. They have lousy policies. Open borders, sanctuary cities, but they have one thing. They stick together and they're vicious. The Republicans have great policy. In many ways they're better politicians, but they're not as vicious.
Look, he's such a pain, when he needs something for Kentucky like money, like aid, like, he wants me to call one of the many manufacturers now that are coming into Kentucky, "Could you call the head of some company in Japan, please?" I say, "Matt, do I have to do it?" "Please, please." But isn't that really what you want in a governor? [cheers and applause] That's what you want. [cheers and applause] He's such a pain in the ass, but that's what you want. [cheers and applause] And the job he's done, one of the best in the country. Not the best. He's been incredible. Matt is strong on crime and tough on illegal immigration. Thank you. [cheers and applause] He's pro-worker, pro-life, and 100% pro-Second Amendment. [cheers and applause]
They said, "Isn't that terrible?" Countries that have crime rates that are so high you wouldn't even believe it's possible, and we have a travel ban now. We don't take people from those countries, I'm sorry. And we won a historic victory on the travel ban in the United States Supreme Court, ruled it totally constitutional. On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than on immigration. Democrats want open borders. They wanna give illegal aliens free healthcare, free education, more advantages than our own citizens have, and more benefits than our own military gets. [booing] In the Republican party, we believe taking care of our own citizens first is paramount. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Democrats more totally betrayed you than immigration. They threw you open, and you saw it, all through the years. They threw open your borders to drug dealers, human traffickers, and to vicious MS-13 gang members, and now, we're getting them out of the country by the thousands. [applause] Thanks to our tireless efforts to secure our Southern border, illegal crossings have now dropped 70% since May. And when you look at what's happening over there, there's a good reason for what we're doing. We are building that wall faster than anyone thought it was possible to build, the Army Corps of engineers. We're also confronting the deadly menace of sanctuary cities, which release dangerous criminal aliens into your neighborhoods, school zones, and city streets.
With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress. We're going to be able to do that. We have to be able to do that to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration and many other things. We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, made in the USA. [applause]
But they have 27,000 soldiers on our border now protecting us from people coming into our country. And because of that, I'm not tariffing Mexican goods. So it works out well for everyone. But we have 27,000 Mexican soldiers. And they play by different rules than our people. If our people speak rudely to a person coming in, it means they get the electric chair. [Laughter] It's a very unfair situation. Our border is so—our laws are so bad—our immigration laws. It's so sad.
On no issue have Democrat politicians more totally betrayed you than on immigration. The radical Democrats open border agenda invites deadly drugs, vicious gangs and dangerous criminals to pour into your communities, your neighborhoods, your state. Right here in Louisiana, our brave ICE officers have arrested criminal aliens, charged or wanted for murder, manslaughter, sexual battery, assault, fraud, forgery, malicious bodily injury, drug dealing, possession of stolen weapons, and child abuse.
To create a fair, safe, sane and lawful system of immigration, we will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful term: Made in the USA. [cheers and applause]
We are finally putting America. First. Past leaders transform faraway nations into blood-soaked war zones. Then they demanded that Americans accept unlimited migration from those same terror afflicted regions. We don't want to do that [booing]. We don't want to do that and we're not doing that. As President, I will not allow our immigration system to be used against us. I will not allow political correctness to put our families in danger and our communities at risk. We won't do it. [applause]
We're doing great on the border or no issue have Democrat politicians become more dangerous than immigration. The Democratic Party wants open borders, which is a betrayal of every mother and father—[booing]—who wants deadly drugs to be kept out of their community. They want open borders. I mean figure this one.
In the Republican Party we believe that all Americans, including millions of wonderful legal immigrants, are entitled to an immigration system that puts their needs first. We want to come first, we want to let people in you know the big door that I used to talk--we want a big door, but people have to come in legally and they have to come in through merit have to come in through—[applause]—but thanks to our tireless efforts to secure the border, Border Patrol, ICE, law enforcement, incredible people, illegal crossings are down 70 percent since May. And the wall is going up faster than anybody ever would have thought and that wasn't easy getting that it wasn't easy. [applause]
Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane and lawful system of immigration. They don't want to approve loopholes. They don't want to approve anything. They want people to pour into our country, and many of those people are very bad people. With the help of our governor and our great congressmen and senators, we will fight to give school choice to every child in America who needs it [applause].
We gave up on the globalist folks. Ya know let's build the world. Let's forget about our country. Let's just rebuild the world. On no issue have the Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on the issue of immigration. Far left politician--I mean, they're fighting me on the wall, you have no idea. But we're building it and it's fine and we have the money coming in from the military. I've got it from here, from there, from there. Believe me, if I weren't a good developer, you could forget about that wall. I've got here, there, there. Hmm, ah. These people fought me and we've started winning in court. You know what? Speaking of court, we will soon have 182 federal judges, including Court of Appeals. [applause] Nobody can believe it. All because Barack Obama gave us 142 empty seats.
Thanks to Democrat immigration policies, innocent Americans in all 50 states are being brutalized and murdered by illegal alien criminals. Last summer, at least 19 illegal aliens were charged in connection with grisly homicides, including hacking victims to death and ripping out, in two cases, their hearts. Weeks ago, two illegal aliens and members of the savage gang, MS-13, who we are removing from our country by the thousands—[applause]—were charged with relentlessly beating a wonderful, beautiful high school teenager to death with a baseball bat and chopping the body apart with a machete. One of the animals accused was previously released by local authorities in defiance of an ICE demand. ICE warned and said, "You can't let them go." They wanted them. They would do anything for them. They wanted them to hand this animal over for deportation back to his country. Get them the hell out of our country, right?
But together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." [applause]
On no issue have Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than immigration. Every Democrat running for president wants to open the floodgates to unlimited refugees from all around the world, overwhelming your communities and putting our national security at grave risk. My administration has taken bold action to reduce the influx of refugees, and we are making sure local communities like yours have a much greater say about who gets admitted into your own neighborhoods. [applause] Some of these stories are so sad. Some of the stories are so sad. When it comes to setting immigration policy, we always remember this sacred truth: our first duty and our one true allegiance is to you, the American people, before anybody else. We must care for our own citizens first. Democrat immigration policies are resulting in brutal assaults and wicked murders against innocent Americans. I don't know if you even know what's happening. It's terrible. And we've moved out thousands and thousands of MS13 thugs out of our country. [applause]
With your help, we will lift millions of more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will enact the greatest trade deals ever made. They'll result in more products, proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, made in the USA. [applause] We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine. What we're doing is unbelievable. We're so far ahead of everybody. What we've done in the last three years with the FDA and even the speed of what we're doing, it would take 12, 13, 14 years to get things approved. It's down to a much smaller number, but we're finding new cures for childhood cancer and we are ending the AIDS epidemic in America. We've started the process. Who would've thought that? In 10 years, it's a 10-year process, we will have ended the AIDS epidemic in America, and it could have been started before I came to office. It was just wasted time. We will defend privacy, free speech, free assembly, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. [applause]
On no issue have Democrat politicians more thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of illegal immigration.
Only this way can we save the America that we love and drain the Washington swamp once and for all. And I have seen that dirty rotten swamp better than anybody else in America. A lot of crooked people, disgusting crooked people. With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause] We will enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America. Nobody knew that. It could've been done long before I got here. They had the technology. But we're ending the AIDS epidemic in America within 10 years. Isn't that amazing? Who would've thought that's possible? Who would've thought that's possible?
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than that of immigration. [Referring to someone in the crowd.] He goes, "Traitor." Are you having a good time, sir? I think you are. Goes, "Traitor." I guess in a certain way they are traitors, when you think about it. Left wing politicians, I call them the Do-Nothing-Democrats, support deadly sanctuary cities, demonstrating their contempt, scorn and disdain for everyday Americans. These jurisdictions release dangerous, violent, criminal aliens out of their jails and directly onto your streets where they are free to rob, attack and murder American citizens. You have it right here. You have it right here.[booing]
Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration, which now we're already doing. [applause] We're already doing a lot of it. You've gotta get loopholes. You know, you need their votes. We have loopholes, like visa lottery. We put names in a lottery and they come in, they become American citizens. Do you think these countries are giving us their finest? "Oh, let's give them our best citizens, put 'em in." These people are crazy to allow this to happen, so we're stopping it all. But ending catch and release was a very big thing, and we did that with no Democrat help. [applause] They wouldn't do it. It's called loopholes. Who wouldn't want to end loopholes?
But on no issue have Washington Democrats thoroughly betrayed the American people than the issue of immigration. [shouting] Left-wing, radical politicians support deadly sanctuary cities—[booing]—and remember, a sanctuary city is a jurisdiction that refuses to hand over criminal aliens that are in local law enforcement custody. Instead, they order them to be released into your community. What the hell is going on? [booing] What is going on? And once set loose, these criminal aliens are free to continue their crime spree against innocent Americans. Right here in New Jersey, your state's Democrat leaders have instituted sanctuary policies that result in dangerous predators being set free into your community. [booing]
And I'm also very proud to report that we won a critical Supreme Court victory yesterday on immigration. [cheers and applause] We will now be finally able to enforce federal law, and ensure that those seeking admission to our country are able to support themselves financially and not abuse taxpayer-funded programs. [cheers and applause] They were killing our country, killing our country. Washington Democrats have never been more extreme than they are right now. Frankly, they're crazy. These people are crazy. They're taking their cues from socialists like Bernie. Left-wing lawmakers are pushing a government takeover of healthcare that would strip 180 million Americans of their private healthcare plans, which many people like. [booing] The plans of every Democrat running for President would demolish the economy of New Jersey, where half a million new New Jersey workers are employed at some of the best and most innovative healthcare employment companies. We have them working at the companies, and we have people getting great healthcare. It's been so long. It's finally working and they wanna destroy it.
Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. That's what's happening now. [cheers and applause] We will enact trade deals, the greatest deals ever made, that result in more product proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." Beautiful. [cheers and applause] For decades we had politicians that didn't care about that phrase. That phrase didn't mean anything to them.
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on immigration. Illegal immigration costs our nation hundreds of billions of dollars, drains public services, overcrowds our schools and hospitals, and threatens innocent American lives at a number that you wouldn't even believe. But we've got it closed up, but we're getting your people in. You have people that have worked for you for a long time, don't you? I know the people that you have, and they are hard workers. We have a lot of great people. You have a lot of great people out there. Right here in Des Moines, a twice-deported, illegal alien was charged with shooting and killing a woman, her 11-year-old daughter, and her five-year-old son.
Yet today's Democrat party glorifies illegal immigration. We have no idea, now we do now, but people would come in by the hundreds of thousands. We have no idea who they are. Many are fine people and all of that, but some are stone-cold rapists, and murderers, and people that their countries don't want, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and even Mexico. Right now we have a love affair with Mexico because the Democrats, the Democrats wouldn't give us what we needed and I got Mexico, they're great. They put up 27,000 soldiers on our southern border and the numbers are plummeting, 87% down. [cheers and applause]
Today's Democrat party glorifies illegal immigration, vilifies the heroes of law enforcement, and pledges to dissolve immigration control entirely. They want open borders. They want hundreds of thousands of people to flow into our country. And some of those people, some of those people are stone-cold killers. Some of those people, in the caravans, right? I came up with that name but they won't give me credit for that. They don't give me credit for anything. They don't give me credit for fake news. Wasn't that my term? Now they say, I see CNN, they said, "Fake news has reported," no, no, you're fake news, that fake news is you. You're fake news. [booing]
With your help we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. That's what's happening all over our country. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. It's already happening. We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products made, raised, farmed, and grown right here in the USA. We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America in less than 10 years. We've already started.
After years of building up other countries, we are finally rebuilding our country. On no issue of Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than a thing called immigration, right? Before I came into office, the far left's policy of open borders allowed deadly drugs to flow freely into our country and that's what they want. I see them campaigning right down the street. It's really boring to watch, but I try and watch. No, I have an obligation to watch really boring stuff. But they want open borders. They want thousands and thousands of people to pour into our country, many of whom are not exactly what we're looking for, okay? I mean murderers, rapists, and some other things. They're going to be poisoning our children with drugs, including right here in New Hampshire, and you have one of the drug problems in the country. And we brought it down 18% but we have to do better. 18%. [applause]
So, this is [showing piece of paper to the crowd]--because we mentioned—Alyssa, I made minor changes. They mentioned illegal immigration. This is about immigration. This is a, this was a song from the 1950s, Al Green. And they mentioned--little changes to it, that's okay. But they mentioned illegal immigration, right? And, I used to do this a lot and people couldn't get enough of it, to be honest with you. And I haven't done it for a while, and I thought I'd do it tonight because you're on the eve of giving us an opponent, and all of these people want open borders. They want open borders. And we don't want open borders. We want very strong closed borders. And we want people to come into our country, but they want to come in through merit and we want them to come in legally, right? Right? [applause] Through merit and legally. Right?
So, we'll do this quickly. This is illegal immigration. It's called–oh, listen to how quiet it is... . Listen to how quiet. Now watch how quiet it gets. It gets so quiet. But this is all about–I love you too. That was a guy that said that, [points to the crowd] but I love him too. I love everybody. Ready? So important. Illegal immigration.
The President. That's a dirty swamp. You have some really evil, dirty, horrible people. Like to say nice, everyone's nice. They're not good. They're not good people. But we're draining that sucker slowly but surely. With your help, we will lift millions of more of our citizens from welfare to work—[applause]—dependence to independence and poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [applause] We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase Made in the USA. We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer and ending the AIDS epidemic in America in less than 10 years. How about that? It'll be done. We will land the first woman in the moon and become the first nation in the world to plant its flag on Mars. We're very advanced. All made in the USA. We will defend privacy, free speech, religious liberty, and the right to—keep and bear arms. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than immigration. You know it almost better than anybody. Anybody, Doug. You know it better than anybody, what they've done on your border, but we're stopping that border. That border is clogged, and we've started the big wall right in Arizona. We've built a lot of wall. That's a big one. [cheers and applause] That's a big one. Top of the line.
Illegal immigration costs Arizona taxpayers more than 2 billion dollars every year. Two billion you're paying. Nearly 20% of Arizona's annual budget in general funds goes toward this big problem.
At stake in our present battle is the survival of our nation. It is. This election is so important. It's the survival of our nation. If you want your children to inherit the blessings that generations of Americans have fought and died for to secure, then we must devote everything we have toward victory in November of 2020. [cheers and applause] You're the forgotten people no more. You're no longer the f–... Right? No deplorables, right? No deplorables. Who knew that was gonna turn out to be such a disaster? But you know, she used the worst word. What was the word she used? "Irredeemables," right? I thought that was the problem. No, it was deplorables. So what the hell do I know about politics? She said, "You're irredeemable and deplorable." I said, "Oh, that irredeemable's terrible." The next day people are showing up. Women, "I'm a deplorable." [cheers and applause] Only this way can we save the America we love and drain the Washington swamp, which is vicious, horrible, ugly, and evil. Much worse than I thought. But we're getting there and not pleasant. A bunch of really bad people, very dishonest people. With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to independence, and from poverty to prosperity. Together, we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will continue to enact trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with those beautiful, beautiful words and phrase. I love the phrase, "Made in the USA." Made in the USA. [cheers and applause]
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than on immigration. Right? Every day Democrats' open border policies are harming and killing innocent lives. In this region alone, last year ICE officers arrested over 2000—And by the way, our ICE officers, these guys are tough and they're brave. [cheers and applause] Over 2000 criminal aliens, that's MS-13 gangs, thousands, and they bring them back to where they came from. And by the way, now their countries take them back. They weren't taking them back, safe third agreements. They take them back. Charged or convicted of dangerous offenses including robbery, rape, and murder. We bring them back and in some cases we don't even wanna bring them back. We have to put them. I don't wanna house them for the next 50 years, but you know what? We don't want to take chances either, but we'll bring them back to Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Mexico. We bring them back. They didn't use to take them. They said, "We don't want them back." "Oh, okay, we'll keep them ourselves." We don't do that anymore. [cheers and applause]
With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. You know that. Right? Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. We will continue to enact great new trade deals like we've been doing. I'm going to India next week and we're talking trade. They've been hitting us very hard for many, many years, but I really like Prime Minister Modi. We gotta talk a little. We gotta talk a little business. They've been hitting us hard.
On no issue of Washington Democrats more thoroughly sold out the American people than the issue of immigration. Every Democrat running for president supports free federal welfare for illegal aliens funded by you, the American taxpayer. They wanna treat illegal aliens, people that come into our country illegally, better than they wanna treat our military and our veterans. [booing] Not only does illegal immigration drain our treasury, but it threatens innocent lives. I recently invited to the White House the granddaughter of a 92 year-old woman who was raped, beaten, brutalized, and murdered by an illegal alien who had previously been set free in New York City.
Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system, finally, of immigration. We will continue to enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." We will achieve new breakthroughs in science and medicine, finding new cures for childhood cancer, infectious diseases like we're working on right now, and ending the AIDS epidemic, nobody thought this was possible, in less, now, than nine years, and it should have been started before. We will end the AIDS epidemic. Who would have thought we could have done that?
And we're doing well in Pennsylvania I hear, right? And South Carolina, I know we're doing great there. [cheers and applause] Also with us tonight is a man who's really become a good friend of mine. We were going at it a little bit at the beginning, but I will tell you, and I would say if, if I didn't get along, I would not be here. I wouldn't do this. I think he's been tremendous. He's been a tremendous supporter and things that we've wanted to do, and fights that we've had which were so important, he's been right up, and Lizzie will tell you that he's been right up in front and really he deserves another six-year term, and probably a lot longer than that, but he's gonna come up and I'm gonna ask Senator Thom Tillis, come on up. [cheers and applause] Thom has really been incredible, he's been working everyday. And he really wants to fight the radical left and he does it and he knows how to fight, and take care of our amazing veterans, and stop illegal immigration. Thom is a champion for the people of North Carolina. This November, we need everybody to go and vote for Thom, he's doing great. He's doing great. I hear he's way up in the polls, he's way up in the polls. Thom, say a few words. Come here.
On no issue have Washington Democrats more thoroughly betrayed the American people than on the issue of immigration. Every Democrat running for president supports free federal welfare for illegal aliens, on your tax. [booing] Not only does illegal immigration drain our treasury, but it threatens innocent lives. As just one heartbreaking example, two illegal aliens in Maryland who had been previously charged with attempted murder were released, unaccountably released, and they went on to murder a teenage girl beating her with a baseball bat and slashing her with a machete. The entire Democratic field supports deadly sanctuary cities, which release dangerous criminals to terrorize your communities. Right here in North Carolina, believe it or not, the sanctuary county of Durham released an illegal alien criminal, who then proceeded to viciously murdered a young 19 year-old woman last year, you know all about it, killing her and dumping her body into the woods.
Only this way can we save the America we love, and drain the Washington swamp, which is, by the way, much more vicious, much dirtier, much deeper than I ever thought, but we are kicking ass, let me tell you that. We are kicking ass. [cheers and applause] With your help, we will lift millions more of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. Together we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration. [cheers and applause] And we will continue with the great Thom Tillis. We will get Thom Tillis. Thom, I don't, I don't think anybody even wants to run against you, Thom, but we're gonna reelect Thom Tillis. Is that right? We're gonna reelect Thom Tillis. And if we don't, I'm gonna be so angry at you. [shouting] I'll only come back here a few times a year, if that's okay. No, Thom is gonna be great. Thom, I think you're in great shape. I think you're in great shape. One more hand for Thom Tillis, please. [cheers and applause] We don't even know who's running against him. Nobody wants to run.
In normal times, these massive flows place a vast burden on our health care system, but during a global pandemic, they threaten to create a perfect storm that would spread the infection to our border agents, migrants, and to the public at large. Left unchecked, this would cripple our immigration system, overwhelm our health care system, and severely damage our national security. We're not going to let that happen. So we have a lot of information, and they'll be discussing that in a moment.

Attorney General Barr. Actually, the immigration laws are no longer under the administration of the Department of Justice, and I haven't been participating in any of those discussions.

Korea, I renegotiated the deal. I took a horrible deal. That was a Hillary Clinton special. That was a Hillary Clinton special. She said, "We have to make this deal with South Korea. It's going to mean 250,000 jobs." And she was right, for South Korea, 250,000. [shouting] And China's entry into the World Trade Organization was supported by Sleepy Joe Biden. That was one of the worst deals economically in the history of our country. When China joined the World Trade Organization, they became— They were flatline for decades. They became like a rocket ship. He voted for the war in Iraq. He voted for mass amnesty for illegal aliens. He supports sanctuary cities and now Biden wants to end immigration enforcement and require, he wants to require you to provide free healthcare for millions and millions of illegal aliens, okay? [booing]
And we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration that puts American workers first. [cheers and applause] We will revitalize our cities, and we will build gleaming new roads, bridges, tunnels, and airports all across our land. We will enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, "Made in the USA." It's so beautiful, so beautiful. "Made in the USA." That's happening too. We have so many plants coming into Michigan and so many other states. We have car plants coming in, would have never come if I wasn't president, would have never come. We will become the world's premier pharmacy, drug store, and medical manufacturer. That's already started. We're bringing it back. [cheers and applause] We will keep America out of foolish, stupid, ridiculous foreign wars. We will never hesitate to kill America's terrorist enemies. [cheers and applause]
And today, what we're doing on prescription drugs—and again, we'll have to see what happens on August 25. We'll either do "the favored nations" or not, depending on the drug companies. But what we're putting up in a very short period of time on health care will be incredible. We have another one coming on immigration, a tremendous bill on immigration. And it will be, I think, something that nobody thought we would be able to get. So that will be great.

Joe Biden supported every globalist attack on the American worker, NAFTA, which was a disaster, TPP, which I didn't allow to happen, the horrible Korea deal. South China's entry into the World Trade Organization might've been the worst of them all, it created China. Now Biden is running on the most extreme far-left agenda ever put forward by a major party. Biden's joint manifesto, we call it a manifesto, with Bernie Sanders, crazy Bernie, would raise taxes and increase regulations at an unprecedented rate. He will kill the stock market; he will kill everything that we're talking about today. He'd also abolish immigration enforcement, abolish bail, abolish the suburbs, abolish effective policing, abolish American energy, and abolish the American way of life, otherwise, he'd do quite a good job, I think.
To protect our families and workers during the China pandemic, I sealed our border against illegal immigration, and suspended the entry of foreign workers who threatened American jobs. And yet, if you're a farmer, a factory owner and you had people coming in from years, we made it easier for those people to keep coming in. I can't shut them off, you'd have to close up your businesses. Joe Biden, on the other hand, has pledged to allow virtually unlimited immigration during a global pandemic, spreading the virus, overwhelming our healthcare system, and displacing millions of American job seekers. The Biden plan would institute catch and release, I got rid of it, along the entire Southwest border. This is where you catch perhaps a murderer, perhaps a rapist. You catch somebody, you take their number, and you release them. You say, "Please show up to court in three years," nobody shows up. 1% show up. You know who the 1% are? The ones that aren't very smart. They're the ones that show up, they're the only ones that show up.
Joe Biden has pledged to abolish immigration enforcement, suspend all removals, provide free government healthcare, and, you know, they want to give it to illegal aliens. You don't get it. You don't get it. Restore, catch and release. Shield violent criminal aliens. This is what they want to do. And give every illegal alien on the planet earth a free ticket to invent an asylum claim and gain automatic admission into our country. We will have people coming into our country that never even thought of it before. You get free education, you get free healthcare, why wouldn't they come? Let's go to America. The Biden plan would unleash a flood of illegal immigration like the world has never seen. It's crazy. Biden's plan is the most radical, extreme, reckless, dangerous, and deadly immigration plan ever put forward by a major party candidate. It must be defeated, and it will be defeated on November 3rd. It will be defeated. [cheers and applause]
And perhaps no area did the Washington special interests try harder to stop us than on my policy of pro-American immigration. [applause]
Liberal politicians claim to be concerned about the strength of American institutions. But who exactly is attacking them? Who is hiring the radical professors, judges and prosecutors? Who is trying to abolish immigration enforcement and establish speech codes designed to muzzle dissent.
Perhaps in no area have our opponents more thoroughly betrayed working families of all backgrounds than on the subject of immigration, you know we've been fighting for that. Under my administration we achieved the most secure border in American history. [cheers and applause] We ended catch and release, stopped asylum fraud, and we've deported 20,000 gang members and we get them out and we get them out fast. [cheers and applause] Thank you ICE. ICE and Border Patrol. ICE and Border Patrol. They don't like ICE because ICE is ... They're tough. You gotta be tough in that job, by the way. Anybody up here like to work in ICE? I don't think so. Let's see, you could probably be okay, but you'd rather do what you're doing, right? I agree with you. These are tough guys, they have to be tough. These are bad, bad gang members. I mean, you look at MS-13, you look at what's happened with MS-13, you look at ... We get them the hell out. Sometimes we have to put them in prison because we don't even wanna take a chance, they can come back in after what they've done.
The President. Perhaps in no area have our opponents more thoroughly betrayed working families of all backgrounds than on the subject of immigration. Under my administration, we've achieved the most secure border in American history. Now, I have to tell you that 300 miles of wall helps a lot. [cheers and applause] Remember they said, "Walls are old-fashioned. They don't work." Really? I always say, and I've said it four or five times. I'll say it again if you'd like me to, two things if you come back in a thousand years, 2000 years, or 3000 years. If you're lucky enough, assuming we have something with the world is a crazy place, isn't it? But if you come back in a thousand years, there are two things, with all the computers, and all the everything changes every day, you invent a new cell, you invent a new laptop. Everything is obsolete like about two weeks after you invent it, right? Two things that will never get obsolete, the wall and the wheel, right? [cheers and applause] The wheel and the wall.
Perhaps in no area have our opponents more thoroughly betrayed working families of all backgrounds than on the subject of immigration. Under my administration, we've achieved the most secure border in American history. [cheers and applause] We've ended catch-and-release, stopped asylum fraud, and we've deported over 20,000 vicious gang members and over a half a million criminal illegal aliens. [cheers and applause] As I said, we've already built over 310 miles of border wall. It's all gonna be finished very quickly. We're averaging about 10 new, brand-new, beautiful miles every single week. It'll be finished very shortly. [cheers and applause]
Monica Yellin. Good afternoon. "We welcome new citizens who love our people and share our values." Poland speech [by Donald Trump], 2017. "Immigrants enrich this country, and I want them to come in big numbers." The State of the Union, 2019. Mr. President, these words will resonate with me forever. Thank you so much for what you do for the Latino community, for securing our borders, for supporting legal immigration, and for your efforts again, child exploitation and for—[cheers and applause]—and for being so successful fighting human trafficking.
Automatically, anything we do, they just take the reverse. But you know what? I'd probably do it to them too, so I can't complain. [laughter] On perhaps no issue have our opponents more thoroughly betrayed working families of all backgrounds than on the subject of immigration. Under my administration, we've achieved the most secure border in American history. We ended the catch and release. You know what catch and release is? You catch them, they may be a killer, they may be a criminal at the highest order, you take their name. Then you're supposed to bring them to a court, like Perry Mason, right? But we actually catch them, take their name, release them, say, "Come back in about four years for your court case." We ended all this stuff. And you think that was easy? It wasn't easy, let me tell you.
Uh, on perhaps no issue, though, have our opponents been more thoroughly betrayed, they have just betrayed the working families of all backgrounds, than on the subject of immigration. They betrayed our nation. If you look at what the Democrats have done on immigration, they made it very difficult for us, but we broke through, and now we're doing phenomenally on immigration, the best numbers we've ever had.
By contrast, Biden has promised open borders, zero deportations, outrageous taxpayer giveaways for illegal aliens, tremendous tax increases. He wants to increase your taxes, quadruple your taxes. Biden wants to return to the same weak immigration policies as the Obama administration had that allowed MS-13 to spread all over Virginia. You were one of the biggest victims, your state, of MS-13, and we've cleared 'em out. ISIS done, by the way, a fantastic job.
Joe Biden opposed the mission to take out Osama bin Laden. He opposed killing Soleimani. He voted for the Iraq War. He backed the disastrous Iran Nuclear Deal. And he cheered for the rise of China as a positive development for our country. I don't think so. [booing] That was a disaster. Now Biden has put forward the most dangerous and extreme platform of any major party nominee in history. The bad news is he doesn't even know what the hell it is. [laughter] The Biden plan would destroy Social Security and destroy protections for pre-existing conditions. It will drain your Medicare by giving free healthcare to illegal immigrants that will come over to this country by the millions when they see this. End virtually all immigration enforcement and impose totally open borders. He would terminate our travel bans on jihadist regions. Remember I got that approved? They kept saying, "Oh, he lost. He lost. He lost." And then I won in the Supreme Court. We have a travel ban. Guess what?
On immigration
Senator Perdue has been a tremendous leader on pro-American immigration reform. Like nobody else. He voted very powerfully when I was going through hell on the wall. They would have given me anything. They gave me the money for the military. They just didn't want to give me money for the wall. So, I took it out of the military. What the hell could I—? That was rather good. It's good to be a developer every once in a while. That was the one where the judges ruled yesterday. So, they said it was fine because I called it national security. So, we took it out of the military—they didn't figure that one out. Now they do. But you know what? They don't have to be careful because it's turned out to be very popular, very successful.
When Georgia needed a strong voice in Washington after Hurricane Michael, remember Hurricane Michael? And I was down here with David, but David Purdue led the charge to get the workers and farmers of your state the relief you deserved. He said, "Sir, can we get a billion dollars?" And I said, "We're gonna get it David." And we got it very fast. And there was no mechanism to get it. You got hit with a hurricane the—like you have never seen before, came in from a location that is just very unique. It was a horrible thing. I was here for a long time with David, and he worked and he, and his uh, his kin, you know, his kin, the great Sonny Perdue, our Department of Agriculture, our Secretary of Agriculture was fantastic also. But we worked very hard, and we got the farmers and the businesses the money that they had to have. And now they're thriving. David has also been one of the most courageous advocates fighting for an immigration system that defends American workers, American wages, American families, and American jobs. He led the effort in Congress to build the wall. That's right. And Kelly helped on that she's a little bit newer to the Senate, but she helped a lot. Those last moments you were there, without you it wouldn't 've happened, actually. Cracked down on deadly sanctuary cities, and chain migration and institute on parallel protection for our great citizens. He fought to help us replaced NAFTA disaster with the brand new USMCA, they said it couldn't be done. A giant victory for Georgia, for workers, and for farmers all over our country. NAFTA was the worst trade deal probably ever signed. And that maybe has to exclude some of the crazy deals and things they did with China. We voted to confirm nearly 300 federal judges. We have a record on federal judges, and three Supreme Court justices, which is a tremendous thing. We have almost 300 federal judges committed to interpreting our Constitution as written. No one fights harder for the people of Georgia than David Purdue.
Lastly, and very importantly, we must immediately suspend immigration from any nation that has been compromised by terrorism until such time as proven vetting mechanisms have been put in place. We don't want them in our country.
Decades of record immigration have produced lower wages and higher unemployment for our citizens, especially for African-American and Latino workers. We are going to have an immigration system that works, but one that works for the American people.
We are going to build a great border wall to stop illegal immigration, to stop the gangs and the violence, and to stop the drugs from pouring into our communities. I have been honored to receive the endorsement of America's Border Patrol Agents, and will work directly with them to protect the integrity of our lawful, lawful, lawful immigration system. Lawful.
Tonight, I want every American whose demands for immigration security have been denied – and every politician who has denied them – to listen very very closely to the words I am about to say.
My plan is the exact opposite of the radical and dangerous immigration policy of Hillary Clinton. Americans want relief from uncontrolled immigration. Communities want relief.
Yet Hillary Clinton is proposing mass amnesty, mass immigration, and mass lawlessness. Her plan will overwhelm your schools and hospitals, further reduce your jobs and wages, and make it harder for recent immigrants to escape the tremendous cycle of poverty that they're going through right now and make it almost impossible to join the middle class.
Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.
Anybody ever hear of NAFTA? [Laughter] I ran a campaign somewhat based on NAFTA. But we're going to start renegotiating on NAFTA, on immigration, and on security at the border. And Mexico has been terrific, actually terrific. And the President has been really very amazing, and I think we're going to have a very good result for Mexico, for the United States, and for everybody involved. It's very important. It's a very, very important thing.

We are in the middle of a crisis on our southern border. The unprecedented surge of illegal migrants from Central America is harming both Mexico and the United States. And I believe the steps we will take, starting right now, will improve the safety in both of our countries. It's going to be very, very good for Mexico. A nation without borders is not a nation. Beginning today, the United States of America gets back control of its borders, gets back its borders. Thank you. I just signed two Executive orders that will save thousands of lives, millions of jobs, and billions and billions of dollars. These two orders are part of an immigration reform we outlined during the campaign.
Here is a brief summary of what actions are contained in my Executive orders. The Secretary of Homeland Security, working with myself and my staff, will begin immediate construction of a border wall. So badly needed. You folks know how badly needed it is as a help, but very badly needed. This will also help Mexico by deterring illegal immigration from Central America and by disrupting violent cartel networks.
Pundits talk about how enforcing immigration laws can separate illegal immigrant families, but the families they don't talk about are the families of Americans forever separated from the people they love. They don't talk about that ever. As your President, I have no higher duty than to protect the lives of the American people. First, these families lost their loved ones. Then, they endured a system that ignored them, while at the same time constantly rewarding those who broke the law. For these families, it's been one injustice after another. But that all turns around beginning today.
We've put in place the first steps in our immigration plan: ordering the immediate construction of the border wall, putting an end to catch-and-release, expediting the removal of criminal—this is so important to me. From day one, I've said it, and I mean the immediate removal of criminal aliens. They're going to be gone, fast. And finally, at long last, cracking down on sanctuary cities.

Most illegal immigration is coming from our southern border. I've said many times that the American people will not pay for the wall, and I've made that clear to the Government of Mexico.

In recent days, we have begun to take necessary action to achieve that goal. Our Nation has the most generous immigration system in the world. But these are those—and there are those that would exploit that generosity to undermine the values that we hold so dear. We need security. There are those who would seek to enter our country for the purpose of spreading violence or oppressing other people based upon their faith or their lifestyle. Not right. We will not allow a beachhead of intolerance to spread in our Nation. You look all over the world, and you see what's happening.
We have a full agenda, unlike a lot of other meetings that happen of this general type. We're going to cover some of the immigration things. We're going to cover regulatory relief. We're going to cover tax and trade, women in the workplace, infrastructure, and education. And in each of those areas, we'll get suggestions, ways to make things happen, happen faster to improve the country.

Mr. Gray. Do you feel your immigration policy and the recent Executive order might hurt the bid and cost L.A. some IOC votes?

Acting Attorney General Boente. Judge Gorton, who wrote that decision, had a very good analysis where he referred to immigration law, and I thought it was a terrific opinion. And I think it's the right opinion.
Sheriff Mahoney. I want to thank you too for seeking the input and guidance of our Nation's sheriffs on issues like immigration. My community is looking for immigration reform, an expedited way for a good immigrant to obtain citizenship in this great country. And I appreciate the invitation today to join you and look forward to working with you on many of these issues. Some we'll disagree on, but far more we're going to agree on.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. President, you know we have been invited to the White House before. And we've sat at this table with the former administration. But this is totally different. Not once did the President go around the room and ask the sheriffs what were issues that were important to us, he or she, in our parts of the country, but rather, it was an outgoing message about gun control, about other things. You asked us what is important to us, whether it's mental health in the jails, opioid addiction. You hit on them right off the bat: the border, immigration, vetting. We appreciate that. That has not happened before. We've been here before, but we've never had a President to sit down and listen to what it is that we're facing representing our constituents and public safety across this country. And that's why we appreciate it. That's why we're here today with you.
We have an increased threat, since I was a United States attorney, from terrorism. Mr. President, you've spoken firmly on that. You've led this Nation to say we're going to respond effectively to the threat of terrorism, and you can count on your Department of Justice to do so in an effective way. And you've said something that I believe—and I think the American people believe—that we need a lawful system of immigration; one that serves the interests of the people of the United States. That's not wrong, that's not immoral, that's not indecent. We admit a million people a year plus, who—lawfully, and having—we need to end this lawlessness that threatens the public safety, pulls down wages of working Americans.

My administration is committed to your security, which is why we will continue to fight to take all necessary and legal action to keep terrorists—radical and dangerous extremists—from ever entering our country. We will not allow our generous system of immigration to be turned against us as a tool for terrorism and truly bad people. We must take firm steps today to ensure that we are safe tomorrow.

Prime Minister Abe. Now, in the world, we are also facing the issues of the refugees and terrorism. We need to work closely together on these global issues. Japan have always played our own role, but going forward, we would continue to work with the international community to execute our responsibility in a commensurate manner. And each of our country has immigration control scheme, as well as policy on immigration, as well as refugees. These are to do with domestic affairs of that country, so I would refrain from making any comments.

President Trump. Well, we just began discussions. We are going to have a great relationship with Canada, maybe as good or better, hopefully, than ever before. We have some wonderful ideas on immigration. We have some, I think, very strong, very tough ideas on the tremendous problem that we have with terrorism. And I think when we put them all together, which will be very, very quickly—we have a group of very talented people—we will see some very, very obvious results. We're also doing some cross-border things that will make it a lot easier for trade and a lot better and a lot faster for trade.

Prime Minister Trudeau. One of the things we spoke about was the fact that security and immigration need to work very well together. And certainly, Canada has emphasized security as we look towards improving our immigration system and remaining true to the values that we have. And we had a very strong and fruitful discussion on exactly that.

At the same time, we continue to pursue our policies of openness towards immigration, refugees, without compromising security. And part of the reason we're—we have been successful in doing that over the past year—welcoming close to 40,000 Syrian refugees—is because we have been coordinating with our allies, the United States and around the world, to demonstrate that security comes very seriously to us. And that's something that we continue to deal with.

And, Prime Minister Trudeau, you've made very clear that Canada has an open-door policy for Syrian refugees. Do you believe that President Trump's moratorium on immigration has merit on national security grounds?

You want low-cost American energy also, which means lifting the American restrictions on oil, on shale, on natural gas, and on clean, very clean coal. We're going to put the miners back to work. The miners go back to work. You want us to enforce our immigration laws and to defend our borders. You want fair trade deals and a level playing field. We don't have a level playing field. Because you understand that when American workers win, America as a country wins and wins big. And every country over the last long period of time has been taking advantage of the stupidity of our politicians. It's not going to happen any longer.

By stopping the flow of illegal immigration, we will save countless tax dollars, and that's so important because the tax—the dollars that we're losing are beyond anything that you can imagine. And the tax dollars that can be used to rebuild struggling American communities, including our inner cities. We are also going to save countless American lives. As we speak today, immigration officers are finding the gang members, the drug dealers, and the criminal aliens, and throwing them the hell out of our country. And we will not let them back in. They're not coming back in, folks. If they do, they're going to have bigger problems than they ever dreamt of.

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security. By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone. We want all Americans to succeed, but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos. We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.

Switching away from this current system of lower skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more benefits. It will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families—including immigrant families—enter the middle class. And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy, indeed.

In the first full month of my administration following the issuance of my Executive orders, illegal immigration on our southern border fell by an unprecedented 40 percent. I want to congratulate General Kelly.

My administration is also following through on our promise to secure, protect, and defend that border within our United States. Our southern border will be protected always. It will have the wall. Drugs will stop pouring in and poisoning our youth, and that will happen very, very soon. You're already seeing what's going on. The drugs are pouring into our country, folks. They are poisoning our youth and plenty of others, and we're going to stop it. We're not going to be playing games. Not going to be playing games. Following my Executive action—and don't forget, we've only been here for like, what, 50 days?—we've already experienced an unprecedented 40-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border; 61 percent—61 percent—since Inauguration Day—61 percent. Think of that.

We're also working, night and day, to keep our Nation safe from terrorism. We have seen the devastation from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino—hundreds upon hundreds of people from outside our country have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in the United States courts. Right now we have investigations going on all over; hundreds of refugees are under Federal investigation for terrorism and related reasons. We have entire regions of the world destabilized by terrorism and ISIS. For this reason, I issued an Executive order to temporarily suspend immigration from places where it cannot safely occur.

The President. The order he blocked was a watered-version of the first order that was also blocked by another judge and should have never been blocked to start with. This new order was tailored to the dictates of the Ninth Circuit's—in my opinion—flawed ruling. This is, in the opinion of many, an unprecedented judicial overreach. The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems—or she—or she. Fortunately, it will not be Hillary she. [Applause] When he or she deems it to be in the national interest of our country——

Anyway, let me just say a few words here about our country. We've come through a torrid time a number of years ago. When I took over the Government back in 2011, we were blocked out of all the markets, the Troika were in town, our sovereignty was gone, our hope was gone; hemorrhage of immigration, and a falloff in all business right across every sector. Now, because of the sacrifices of the people and tough choices made, we're in a different spot. Unemployment, which was 15.2, is now down to 6.6 percent and falling. Employment is the highest in 10 years. A growth rate of 5.2 percent last year. Fourth year running, Ireland is the fastest growing country in Europe. Deficit eliminated next year. Two million-plus working now. I was accused in Cork 3 weeks ago of blocking up the Irish roads with people going to work. [Laughter] That's the challenge of success, I suppose.
And secondly, as a part of the overall immigration reform that the Irish have contributed so much, it would be part of that. And we look forward to the works that will take place at the time ahead.
And this administration, working with Democrats and Republicans, I hope, can sort this out once and for all. And for future years, you determine what it is that you want to do. As George Mitchell said last evening, you can't return to open immigration, but for the people who are here—who should be here, might be here—that's an issue that I'm sure your administration will reflect on. And we in Ireland will give you every assistance in that regard.
We also recognize that immigration security is national security. We must protect our citizens from those who seek to spread terrorism, extremism, and violence inside our borders. Immigration is a privilege, not a right, and the safety of our citizens must always come first, without question.

Migration, immigration, integration has to be worked on, obviously. Traffickers have to be stopped. But this has to be done while looking at the refugees as well, giving them opportunities to shape their own lives where they are; help countries who right now are not in an ability to do so, sometimes because they have civil war. I think that's the right way of going about it. And this is obviously what we have an exchange of views about, but my position is the one that I have just set out for you.

Uncontrolled immigration -- you see what's going on there; that's happening quickly. Little problem with the courts not wanting to give us the decisions that should be given -- but we're going to win it -- and a financial system stacked against the American people.

Since the day of my election, we've already cut illegal immigration at the southern border by 61 percent. (Applause.) Sixty-one percent that we haven't started. And the courts are not making it easy, folks. They're not making it easy.

We're also going to protect your jobs by protecting our borders. My administration is—just a matter of weeks, in literally, a short period of time—has brought record reductions to illegal immigration. Record reductions. Down 61 percent since Inauguration. General Kelly is doing a fantastic job. And we'll crack down on visa abuses that undermine the American worker. And we're doing that right now.

Security begins at the border. As a candidate, I pledged to take swift and decisive action to secure the border, and that is exactly what I have done. We inherited a full-fledged border crisis; it was a disaster. Yet, with quick and bold steps, we have so far exceeded even the most bullish predictions for the progress we could make in so short a period of time. Last month, we saw a 64-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border.

Secondly, we are going to enforce the "hire American" rules that are designed to protect jobs and wages of workers in the United States. We believe jobs must be offered to American workers first. Does that make sense? Right now widespread abuse in our immigration system is allowing American workers of all backgrounds to be replaced by workers brought in from other countries to fill the same job for sometimes less pay. This will stop. American workers have long called for reforms to end these visa abuses. And today, their calls are being answered for the first time. That includes taking the first steps to set in motion a long-overdue reform of H-1B visas.

The President: No. Because, um, I'm at odds on, you know, the NATO payments and I'm at odds on immigration. We had unbelievable chemistry. And people have given me credit for having great chemistry with all of the leaders, including el-Sissi. ...

The President: Yes. Yes. That's our policy. I am not saying ... long-term, we are going to have to fix the problem, the whole immigration problem. But I will tell you: Right now we have a great gentleman, one of my real stars is Gen. Kelly, now Secretary Kelly. We are down 73 percent at the border, we are cleaning out cities and towns of hard-line criminals, some of the worst people on earth, people that rape and kill women, people that are killing people just for the sake of having fun. They are being thrown in jails and they are being ... all over the country and nobody's ever done it like us, so we are being unbelievably thorough with that. We are out in Long Island cleaning out the MS-13 scum, they are all scum, that's probably the worst gang anywhere on Earth. ...

And Attorney General Sessions is putting our priorities into action. He's going after the drug dealers who are peddling their poison all over our streets and destroying our youth. He's going after the gang members who threaten our children. And he's fully enforcing our immigration laws in all 50 States. And you know what? It's about time.

You know, they're trying to use this number against us because we've done so unbelievably at the borders already. They're trying to use it against us. But you need that wall to stop the human trafficking, to stop the drugs, to stop the wrong people. You need the wall. But listen to this: We've already seen a 73 percent decrease—never happened before—in illegal immigration on the southern border since my election—73 percent.

And the world is getting the message. They know that our border is no longer open to illegal immigration and that if you try to break in, you'll be caught, and you'll be returned to your home. You're not staying any longer. And if you keep coming back illegally after deportation, you will be arrested, prosecuted, and you will put behind bars. Otherwise, it will never end.

Let's also remember that immigration security is national security. We've seen the attacks from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino. Hundreds of individuals from other countries have been charged with terrorism-related offenses in the United States.

Perhaps in no area have past Governments sold out special interests and foreign lobbyists more than on the issue of immigration. Year after year, you pleaded for Washington to enforce our laws as illegal immigration surged, refugees flooded in, and lax vetting threatened your family's safety and security.

In just 100 days, we have taken historic steps to secure our border, impose needed immigration control like you've never seen before—is that true?—and properly screen and vet those seeking admission into our country. They are going to come in because they love our country. We're not taking them otherwise.

We are operating on a very simple principle: that our immigration system should put the needs of American workers, American families, American companies, and American citizens first. I appointed a great military general, John Kelly, to lead the Department of Homeland Security.

Last week, we opened an office to support the victims of immigration crime, called VOICE, to make sure that no American victim is ever again ignored by their Government. Not going to happen anymore. And many people are now talking, as I just said, and using this tremendous early progress on the border to say we don't need the kind of safety that we really do need, including the wall. We need safety. We need cameras. We need all of the things that we're going to be putting in, and we need the wall. And we will build a wall as sure as you are standing there tonight. We need the wall.

The Prime Minister and I just finished a productive discussion about the interests of our two countries. Together we discussed crucial issues ranging from national security to trade, to immigration and enhanced economic cooperation. We reaffirmed the tremendous friendship between the United States and Australia and the vital importance of our security and our alliance.

The NATO of the future must include a great focus on terrorism and immigration, as well as threats from Russia and on NATO's eastern and southern borders. These grave security concerns are the same reason that I have been very, very direct with Secretary Stoltenberg and members of the Alliance in saying that NATO members must finally contribute their fair share and meet their financial obligations, but 23 of the 28 member nations are still not paying what they should be paying and what they're supposed to be paying for their defense. This is not fair to the people and taxpayers of the United States. And many of these nations owe massive amounts of money from past years and not paying in those past years. Over the last 8 years, the United States spent more on defense than all other NATO countries combined. If all NATO members had spent just 2 percent of their GDP on defense last year, we would have had another $119 billion for our collective defense and for the financing of additional NATO reserves.

Next, I attended the G-7 right here in Sicily, and made great progress toward very, very vital goals. I laid out my vision for economic growth and fair trade in support of good-paying jobs, and even great-paying middle class jobs and more. And I called for much greater security and cooperation on matters of both terrorism, immigration, migration, to protect our citizens.

One by one, we are keeping the promises I made to American people during my campaign for President, whether it's cutting job-killing regulations; appointing and confirming a tremendous Supreme Court Justice, putting in place tough new ethics rules, achieving a record reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border, or bringing jobs, plants, and factories back into the United States at numbers which no one until this point thought even possible. And believe me, we've just begun. The fruits of our labor will be seen very shortly even more so.
These projects not only opened new lanes of commerce, but inspired the immigration and the dreams of millions and millions of people. We crafted monuments to the American spirit. It's time to recapture our legacy as a nation of builders and to create new lanes of travel, commerce, and discovery. And we're going to see all the way into the future, and the future is going to be beautiful, and the future is going to be bright.

In just a short period of time, we've already added nearly 1 million new jobs and approved historic increases in military spending. We've achieved a record reduction in illegal immigration. Did you see at the southern border? Seventy-five percent. Seventy-five percent. If they do one percent in the past, it used to be, oh, we're doing so well. Seventy-five percent. General Kelly is doing a great job.

And we're achieving these goals by eliminating these job-killing regulations, unlocking American energy, rebuilding our military, pursuing fair and reciprocal trade deals, achieving massive reductions in illegal immigration, transforming the Department of Veterans Affairs, and building a new partnership among nations to defeat terrorism, which we have to do.

Secretary of Homeland Security John F. Kelly. Mr. President, proud to be here. Certainly very proud to represent the quarter of a million men and women that serve the country in DHS. In the 5 months that I've been in the job, we have gone a long way to facilitate the—improve the legal movement of people and commerce across our borders and, yet at the same time, have gone a long way to safeguarding our borders, particularly the southern border, working with all of our partners to the South. A 70-percent drop in illegal immigration. While we still welcome legal immigrants to the tune of over a million a year, we are no longer a friendly environment for illegal border crosses.

My administration is embracing a new spirit of innovation that will make life better for all Americans. And when it comes to what we're here for today, American technology, we're working very diligently with everybody, including Congress, on immigration so that you can get the people you want in your companies. And it's been a tremendous problem that you've had over the past long period of time. So we're working very hard on that, and we'll be able to solve that problem.

But others don't treat us fairly. That's why I believe the time has come for new immigration rules, which say that those seeking admission into our country must be able to support themselves financially and should not use welfare for a period of at least 5 years. And we'll be putting in legislation to that effect very shortly.

We have also issued new directives to protect our police officers and our sheriffs. And we'll always stand with the incredible men and women of law enforcement. All American children, no matter where they live, have the right to grow up in a safe community. No issue is more central to public safety than the issue of immigration and border security. After years of lawlessness, the United States is now enforcing our laws—first time in a long time—and protecting our workers, our schools, and our families.

The media—these people—like to talk about separating families. But the families they never talk about are the American families separated forever from the ones they love because we don't protect our borders and uphold the immigration laws of the United States.

The President. And we came down the escalator—that famous escalator ride, Melania, myself—and the place went nuts, hopefully, because they like me, but I think also they like the policies. I said the truth. I talked about immigration. I talked about what was happening on the borders. I talked about our military. I talked about the drug problems, which are tremendous—even in Iowa—tremendous problems beyond anything we've ever seen before.

We're joined by the chairman of the House Judiciary, Bob Goodlatte, a friend of mine for a long time. Bob is one of the most skilled legislators in Congress—and you didn't even tell me to say that, Bob, right—[laughter]—and he's worked with law enforcement to write a series of critical immigration bills that will close the dangerous loopholes exploited by criminals, gang members, drug dealers, killers, terrorists.

You lost the people that you love because our Government refused to enforce our Nation's immigration laws. And that's even the existing immigration laws, without new laws. That's existing immigration laws. For years, the pundits, journalists, politicians in Washington refused to hear your voices, but on election day, 2016, your voices were heard all across the entire world. Right? You'd better believe it. Nobody died in vain, I can tell you.

Chairman Goodlatte has produced a package of truly key immigration enforcement bills. We've been waiting for these for a long time, and I want to thank you, Chairman, for doing that. Great job. And it's just perfect.

This package includes the Davis-Oliver Act, whose passage I called for nearly a year ago at my Inauguration speech and immigration speech—both—the immigration speech taking place in Phoenix, Arizona. The Davis-Oliver Act was named for Detective Michael Davis and Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver, who were gunned down in the line of duty by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record and two prior deportations. And everybody knew this person was big, big trouble, and they begged law enforcement to get him out. And they were unable to do that.

These beautiful American lives were stolen because our Government refused to do its job. If the Government had simply enforced our immigration laws, these Americans would still be alive today. That's why, since the day I took the oath of office, I have been restoring the enforcement of our immigration laws and the protection and defense of our borders.

The President. Since I took office, we have cut illegal immigration on our southern border by record numbers—78 percent.

As we speak, we are working with two wonderful Senators, Tom Cotton and David Perdue, to create a new immigration system for America. Instead of today's low-skill system—just a terrible system where anybody comes in; people that have never worked, people that are criminals—anybody comes in. We want a merit-based system: one that protects our workers, our taxpayers, and one that protects our economy.

For many years, they exploited America's weak borders and lax immigration enforcement to bring drugs and violence to cities and towns all across America. They're there right now because of weak political leadership, weak leadership, weak policing, and in many cases, because the police weren't allowed to do their job. I've met police that are great police that aren't allowed to do their job because they have a pathetic mayor or a mayor doesn't know what's going on. [Applause]

It's essential that Congress fund hundreds more Federal immigration judges and prosecutors—and we need them quickly, quickly—if we're going to dismantle these deadly networks. And I have to tell you, you know, the laws are so horrendously stacked against us, because for years and years they've been made to protect the criminal. Totally made to protect the criminal, not the officers. You do something wrong, you're in more jeopardy than they are. These laws are stacked against you. We're changing those laws. But in the meantime, we need judges for the simplest thing, things that you should be able to do without a judge. But we have to have those judges quickly. In the meantime, we're trying to change the laws. We're also working with Chairman Bob Goodlatte on a series of enforcement measures—and he's a terrific guy—to keep our country safe from crime and terrorism and in particular, radical Islamic terrorism. A term never uttered by past administration. Never uttered. Did anybody ever hear that term? I don't think so. But you heard it from me.

Failure to enforce our immigration laws had predictable results: drugs, gangs, and violence. But that's all changing now. Under the Trump administration, America is once more a nation of laws and once again a nation that stands up for our law enforcement officers. We will defend our country, protect our communities, and put the safety of the American people first. And I'm doing that with law enforcement, and we're doing that with trade, and we're doing that with so much else. It's called America first. It's called an expression I'm sure you've never heard of: make America great again. [Laughter] Has anybody heard that expression? Have you heard that? Have you heard that expression? That is my promise to each of you, that is the oath I took as President, and that is my sacred pledge to the American people.

Thank you very much. It's great to be here today to unveil legislation that would represent the most significant reform to our immigration system in a half a century. I want to thank Senators Tom Cotton and David Perdue for their tremendous work in putting together this historic and very vital proposal.

As a candidate, I campaigned on creating a merit-based immigration system that protects U.S. workers and taxpayers, and that is why we are here today. Merit-based.

For decades, the United States was operated and has operated a very low-skilled immigration system, issuing record numbers of green cards to low-wage immigrants. This policy has placed substantial pressure on American workers, taxpayers, and community resources. Among those hit the hardest in recent years have been immigrants and, very importantly, minority workers competing for jobs against brand new arrivals. And it has not been fair to our people, to our citizens, to our workers.

The RAISE Act prevents new migrants and new immigrants from collecting welfare and protects U.S. workers from being displaced. And that's a very big thing. They're not going to come in and just immediately go and collect welfare. That doesn't happen under the RAISE Act. They can't do that. Crucially, the green card reforms in the RAISE Act will give American workers a pay raise by reducing unskilled immigration.

This legislation will not only restore our competitive edge in the 21st century, but it will restore the sacred bonds of trust between America and its citizens. This legislation demonstrates our compassion for struggling American families who deserve an immigration system that puts their needs first and that puts America first.

The President. I also proudly announced legislation this week with Senators Tom Cotton and David Perdue to reform our immigration system to protect American workers and American taxpayers. It's called the RAISE Act—R-A-I-S-E—the RAISE Act.

But those days are over. My administration is working tirelessly on behalf of the American people. We have removed regulations and targeted unfair trade practices that are hurting Americans all over the world. We're ending the war on coal and unleashing American energy. We are introducing a tax plan to grow our economy and create more jobs. Factories and plants are coming back into Michigan and Ohio and Pennsylvania and many other States. They are coming back instead of leaving like they have been for decades. And just this week, we announced a historic immigration bill to create a merit-based green card system that ends the abuse of our welfare system, stops chain migration, and protects our workers and our economy. As an example, you cannot get welfare for 5 years when you come into our country. You can't just come in—like in past weeks, years, and decades, you come in—immediately start picking up welfare. For 5 years, you have to say you will not be asking or using our welfare systems.

The most sacred duty of government is to protect the lives of its citizens, and that includes securing our borders and enforcing our immigration laws.

The people of Arizona know the deadly and heartbreaking consequences of illegal immigration: the lost lives, the drugs, the gangs, the cartels, the crisis of smuggling and trafficking. MS-13—we're throwing them out so fast, they never got thrown out of anything like this. We are liberating towns out on Long Island. We're liberating. Can you imagine, in this day and age—in this day and age, in this country—we are liberating towns? This is like from a different age. We are taking these people. They don't shoot people, because it's too fast and not painful. They cut them up into little pieces. These are animals. We are getting them out of here. We're throwing them in jails, and we're throwing them out of the country. We're liberating our towns. You've seen it. You've lived it. And you elected me to put a stop to it. And we are doing a phenomenal job of putting a stop to it. That I can tell you.

After years of defending other countries' borders—can you believe we fight for other countries? We want to defend their borders—we're finally defending our own borders, and we're showing compassion for the struggling American workers who are now starting to see the light, because plants are coming pouring back into our country. And by the way, we're doing a lot of good work on that. But a lot of people are coming back in. We have Foxconn; they make the iPhones, as you know, for Apple. And so many companies are building now in our country, including the auto companies who are coming back. Years of uncontrolled immigration have placed enormous pressure on the jobs and wages of working families, and they've put great burdens on local schools and hospitals. While this may be good for a handful of special interests, it's unfair to working people of all backgrounds, all throughout our country. We want every American community to succeed, including our immigrant communities, but they can't do that if we don't control our borders.

But during that visit, I heard firsthand from the frontline agents about the security threats they confront each and every day, and I pledge my continued resolve to them—and all of you—to keep our country safe. All around the Nation, I have spent time with the wonderful Americans whose children were killed for the simple reason that our Government failed to enforce our immigration laws, already existing laws. And I promised these families, the deaths of their loved ones will not have been in vain. I promised them. I know so many of them.

And that wall is also going to help us, very importantly, with the drug problem and the massive amounts of drugs that are pouring across the southern border. My administration will never back down in demanding immigration control. The American people voted for immigration control. That's one of the reasons I'm here. And that is what the American people deserve, and they're going to get it. So you put pressure. But believe me, one way or the other, we're going to get that wall.

For generations now, the American Legion has taught our young people the principles of "Americanism." You emphasize the need to preserve the Nation's cultural, moral, and patriotic values. You encourage the observation of patriotic holidays. You stress the need to enforce our laws, including our immigration laws. You teach the responsibilities of citizenship and the importance of the Pledge of Allegiance. [Applause] True. So important. And you do it all, as your motto says, "for God and country." That's why we're here today: for America and for God. But to fulfill our patriotic duties, we must take care of our great veterans. One year ago at this gathering—and I remember so many of you so well—I promised you that I would make it my priority to fix the broken VA and deliver our veterans the care they so richly deserve. And you see what's been happening.

He's done a great job for the people of Arizona. He's very strong on borders, very strong on illegal immigration. He is loved in Arizona. I thought he was treated unbelievably unfairly when they came down with their big decision to go get him right before the election voting started, as you know. And he lost in a fairly close election. He would have won the election, but they just hammered him just before the election. I thought that was a very, very unfair thing to do.

Infrastructure we'll be talking about. And we'll probably also be talking about DACA because we don't want to forget DACA. And it's already been a week and a half, and people don't talk about it as much. We want to see if we can do something with regard to immigration, with regard to the 800,000 people that are now young people. They're not children anymore. They were children; now they're young people. But we want to see if we can do something in a bipartisan fashion so that we can solve the DACA problem and other immigration problems. So we'll be discussing that today.
We also understand that immigration security is a national—it's really a national treasure, but it's a national security. We need national security for safety. We're going to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. Sorry. Sorry. Call up some of the other countries in the world, say, "How you doing, folks?" Not so good.
We're creating an immigration system that puts American workers and American families first. We're moving quickly to pass a massive tax cut and simplification for the middle class. We want new tax returns. We want simplification. We want reform. And you know what we really want? We want massive tax cuts. That's what we're doing for business. That's what we're doing for the middle class.
Insurers are fleeing. Doctors are quitting. Choices are disappearing. Congress must do its job by ending the Obamacare nightmare. So, so, to deliver for American families, we are also working to pass the RAISE Act, legislation that would end chain migration and switch our country to a merit-based immigration system. Merit, merit, merit. People that will help our country. People that will help our country.
We have Tom Cotton. We have David Perdue. Two great Senators. And they're working on it. The RAISE Act would keep new immigrations from going on welfare for 5 years.
The President. Isn't that nice? They don't walk over and say, I'm going on welfare. Isn't that nice? Maybe keep them from ever going on welfare. And would require them to support themselves and their families financially. It's time to create an immigration system that serves the interests of the United States of America.
For the first 6 months of my administration, the Department of Homeland Security was led by the great four-star general, John Kelly. Where is John Kelly? Stand up, John. A marine. He's a proud marine. He's done a great job. Secretary Kelly led the department to make historic strides in all of its critical missions, from immigration enforcement, to guarding our coasts, our waterways, to enhancing our resilience against natural disasters and emergencies. He's one of the finest people I have ever had the privilege to know, and we are deeply fortunate that he is now here at the White House as our Chief of Staff. Do you agree with that, Kirstjen?

Last week, I also sent a letter to Congress outlining my administration's top priorities for immigration reform. This was a bottom-up effort driven by dedicated law enforcement professionals, and they took a big oath to protect our Nation. The Justice Department is doing a fantastic job on the border and with regard to immigration, more than anyone has ever seen before from a Justice Department. Thank you very much, Jeff. It's really had an impact and a very positive impact, and now we're going to take it to five steps further.

Our proposal closes dangerous loopholes and vulnerabilities that enable illegal immigration, asylum fraud, and visa overstays. The visa overstays are just—you're talking about numbers that nobody even knows what they are, they're so out of control. And we're going to take care of that.

Crucially, we've asked Congress to ensure that any proposed immigration reform ends chain migration: One person comes in and then brings everybody in his family in with him or her. And we have to end chain migration, which—it's critical for creating a system that puts American workers and the American taxpayer first.

We're going to be doing immigration work that's going to be outstanding, and we're going to have people coming into our country based, hopefully, on a merit system, not just coming in randomly. But they're going to be coming in based on a merit system where they can help us. Because I have companies moving into this country—you saw what happened with the automobile industry last week with five major plants. We have companies pouring back into this country for the first time in anybody's memory. We are actually going to be, fairly soon, at a point where we're going to need workers. Our country is going to do so well. But the tax cuts are going to be a major, major part of it.

We must stop the flow of all types of illegal drugs into our communities. For too long, dangerous criminal cartels have been allowed to infiltrate and spread throughout our Nation. An astonishing 90 percent of the heroin in America comes from south of the border, where we will be building a wall which will greatly help in this problem. It will have a great impact. My administration is dedicated to enforcing our immigration laws, defending our maritime security, and securing our borders.
The President. Well, they say he came in through that program, so we'll see. We're looking at it. But they say he came in. I don't want—I want—look, it's very simple. What we are demanding is merit-based immigration. We want people that are going to help our country. We want people that are going to keep our country safe.

Before we begin, I want to make a very brief announcement. I had an excellent meeting today with Chairman Grassley and other lawmakers on immigration reform. Following the terrorist attack in New York, I'm calling on Congress to immediately terminate the Diversity Visa Lottery Program. It's a disaster for our country.
With that being said, Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi did not show up for our meeting today. I'm not really that surprised. We have a lot of differences. They're weak on crime; they're weak on illegal immigration. They want the illegal folks to come pouring into our border, and a lot of problems are being caused, although we've stopped it to a large extent, as much as you can without the wall, which we're going to get.

The President. Well, we are very far apart because our views on crime and our views on immigration and the military, so many are different. But a lot of things have happened, even over the last 2 hours with respect to the missile launch. We want our military funded, and we want it funded now. It's going to be bigger, better, stronger—it already is—than ever before. But we want to get going on that now. So that is a difference, in all fairness, from this morning when I told them that we're way, way far away.

That's why I recently withdrew the United States from the United Nations plan for global governance of immigration and refugee policy. No borders. It's a no-borders plan. They have a plan: no borders. I heard about it recently. I said, what are you talking about "no borders"? No borders? No borders. Everybody can come in. If you don't mind, I've rejected that plan. Is that okay? [Applause] Okay?

We've also begun the process of building the wall on the southern border. And we are empowering our immigration officers to do their job, and they're doing a great job. ICE and Border Patrol agents are working so hard, and they endorsed us for the election. I say "us" because it's really not me. It's us, all together. It's us. It's us. We're a group—a big group—a big, beautiful group. I'll tell—all you have to do is look around here.

It's time for Congress to adopt a pro-American immigration agenda. Every Member of Congress should be asked where they stand on these issues: blocking funds to sanctuary cities. I don't want to give sanctuary cities money. Passing Kate's Law to put repeat offenders behind bars for a long period of time. Increasing the number of ICE officers, who are fantastic, and Border Patrol officers, so we can dismantle vile criminal gangs, like, as I said, MS-13 animals. Ensuring that new immigrants to our country are financially self-sufficient and will not be on welfare the day they come in. And as I said, ending chain migration. We want a system that is merit based; they come in on merit. They don't come in—a lottery system. How about the lottery system, folks? You see that?

The President. His name is Jones, and he's their total puppet. And everybody knows it. He will never, ever vote for us. We need somebody in that Senate seat who will vote for our "Make America Great Again" agenda, which involves—[applause]—which involves tough on crime, strong on borders, strong on immigration. We want great people coming into our country. Building the wall, strengthening our military, continuing our great fight for our veterans—I love our veterans. We—right? We love our veterans. We want conservative judges like Judge Gorsuch on the Supreme Court. Doing a great job too. We want people that are going to protect your gun rights; great trade deals instead of the horrible deals. And we want jobs, jobs, jobs. So get out and vote for Roy Moore. Do it. Do it. Do it.

In sanctuary States and cities, innocent Americans are at the mercy of criminal aliens because state and local officials defy Federal authorities and obstruct the enforcement of our immigration laws.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

Unfortunately, Democrats in Congress not only oppose our efforts to stop illegal immigration and crack down on sanctuary cities, now they are demanding amnesty as a condition for funding the Government, holding troop funding hostage and putting our national security at risk. We cannot allow it.

As President, my greatest duty is to protect our nation and to protect our people. As we have witnessed recently, America faces grave threats. Terrorists have struck in the streets and subways of New York City twice in a few months. Both terrorists came to our country through the dysfunctional immigration system that we are correcting and rapidly. And one came through chain migration—chain migration; the other, visa lottery. They have a lottery. You pick people. Do you think the country is giving us their best people? No. [Laughter] What kind of a system is that? They come in by lottery. They give us their worst people, they put them in a bin, but in his hand, when he's picking them is, the really, the worst of the worst. Congratulations, you're going to the United States. Okay. [Laughter] What a system, lottery system. [Laughter]
We're calling for Congress to end chain migration and to end the visa lottery system, and replace it with a merit-based system of immigration. We want a system that puts the needs of American families, taxpayers, and security first.
For decades now, U.S. immigration rules have been based on an outdated system known as chain migration. Under chain migration, foreign nationals can come to the United States and bring in unlimited numbers of foreign relatives. A single immigrant can begin a chain that could ultimately bring in dozens of increasingly distant relations.

Because these individuals are admitted solely on the basis of family ties—not skill or not merit—most of this immigration is lower skilled, putting great strain on Federal welfare. And because there is no real selection criteria, the current system is totally incompatible with national security.

It is time to create a merit-based immigration system that makes sense for a modern economy, selecting new arrivals based on their ability to support themselves financially and to make positive contributions to U.S. society. Base it on love of our country. We want people that come in that can love our country.

This process begins with Congress passing a bill to end chain migration and also end the visa lottery. I have called on Congress to do exactly that. Ending chain migration and also ending the visa lottery will allow us to have commonsense immigration rules that promote assimilation and wage growth. It also promotes, most importantly, safety. It'll help Americans, both old and new, to thrive, flourish, and prosper.

And over the profound objections of the American people, our politicians left our borders wide open. Millions of immigrants entered illegally. Millions more were admitted into our country without the proper vetting needed to protect our security and our economy. Leaders in Washington imposed on the country an immigration policy that Americans never voted for, never asked for, and never approved, a policy where the wrong people are allowed into our country and the right people are rejected. American citizens, as usual, have been left to bear the cost and to pick up the tab.

We're restoring immigration enforcement at levels that our country has never seen before and taking the fight to the criminal gangs like MS-13, where we're decimating those animals. They're animals. What they do is horrible, horrible. And we're making the immigration system work for Americans. But we're cleaning out towns of those MS-13 gangsters.

In addition, our border is now strong; we'll be building the wall. Your Second Amendment is safe. We are unlocking America's vast energy resources. We've restored enforcement of immigration laws, taken the fight right to MS-13 and getting them out of the country, and we are now working with Congress to end chain migration and the visa lottery program, which is terrible and brings in people that we don't want in our country.

The President. Important meeting. Thank you very much for being here. We're making a lot of progress on a lot of different things. Today I'm with the Senate working group on immigration. It's become a very big subject. I think that started around November 8 and maybe a year and a half before that, starting with the campaign.

We're all working in an effort to develop an immigration reform plan that will serve the interests of the American workers and the American families and safety. I want to thank Chairman Grassley, along with Senators Tillis and Lankford, Cornyn, Cotton, and Graham for being here today. These are great people. They've become friends of mine, and they love this country. I also want to acknowledge Senator Perdue, who is likewise a terrific person, who has become a very close friend of mine. And he'll be briefed as to what's happening.

Our current immigration system fails Americans. Chain migration is a total disaster, which threatens our security and our economy and provides a gateway for terrorism. Likewise, the visa lottery is bad for our economy and very bad for security. You saw that recently in New York along the West Side Highway.

We need to ensure our immigration officers finally have the resources, tools, and authorities that they desperately deserve and need to save and protect American lives. Even the Border Patrol agents, as you saw recently, killed—a couple of them killed; one very badly hurt. It's a rough job, and they're incredible people, along with the ICE agents. These are incredible people. They've been with me right from the beginning, and they love what we're doing.

That's why our position has been clear and very clear from the beginning. Any legislation on DACA must secure the border with a wall. It must give our immigration officers the resources they need to stop illegal immigration and also to stop visa overstays. And crucially, the legislation must end chain migration. It must end the visa lottery. Dangerous. And I think many of the Democrats agree with us on that now.

Vice President Michael R. Pence. Mr. President, you've made immigration a centerpiece in the national debate over the last year and a half. And—but you said all along the way, we're going to build a wall and reform our immigration system. We're going to enforce the laws of this country for the citizens of this country.

Sen. Graham. Obama couldn't do it. Bush couldn't do it. I think you can do it. There's a deal to be had. If you want it bad enough, we'll get it. It will be good for the country. Everybody has got to give a little bit. But I've never been more optimistic about an immigration reform proposal making it to the President's desk than I am right now.

We have to end chain migration to prevent a future set of new chain migrants coming. And we have to secure our border. We have to enforce our laws on the interior as well, to decrease the illegal immigration that will inevitably encourage overstays.

Senator James P. Lankford. Mr. President, thank you for bringing all of us together. I mentioned to you in September, when you first made the announcement about DACA, that you'd given a tremendous gift to the American people. It's been 20 years since we've had a vote on immigration of any type that's actually passed and become law.

Senator John Cornyn III. Well, Mr. President, thank you for having us here. America is the most generous country in the world when it comes to legal immigration, but that generosity has been abused by people who are exploiting the vulnerabilities we have along the border with the lack of enforcement. And we saw the previous administration that tried to usurp the authority that only Congress and the White House have in passing immigration laws. And they tried to do it by executive action, and the courts just struck that down.

So I do think this is an important opportunity for those of us who care not only about the people and about our legal immigration system that's benefited us all, but also are determined to eliminate and stop illegal immigration, along with the drugs and the harm that that causes. And I do think this is a great opportunity. I hope we make the most of it.

We are here today to advance bipartisan immigration reform that serves the needs of the American families, workers, and taxpayers. It's DACA. We've been talking about DACA for a long time. I've been hearing about it for years, long before I decided to go into this particular line of work. And maybe we can do something.

So, in order to secure it, we need a wall. We need closing enforcement—we have to close enforcement loopholes. Give immigration officers—and these are tremendous people, the border security agents, the ICE agents—we have to give them the equipment they need, we have to close loopholes. And this really does include a very strong amount of different things for border security.

Rep. Hoyer. What happened, Mr. President, I think, is that the Senate passed a comprehensive immigration bill, as you know. We did not consider it in the House, so we didn't reach those issues.

Very frankly, on border security, Mr. McCaul, the chairman of the committee, reported out a unanimous security solution, which we then included in the bill that we filed on comprehensive immigration reform. So I think we can reach agreement.

The President. Well, I also think that, after we do DACA—and I really believe we should be able to be successful—I really think we should look in terms of your permanent solution and to the whole situation with immigration. I think a lot of people in this room would agree to that also, but we'll do it in steps. And most people agree with that, I think, Dick. We'll do the steps. Even you say, "Let's do this, and then we go phase two."

The one thing I don't want to have happen here is what I saw in the past. There were four bills that were passed on border security years ago that never got finished. There were immigration bills passed that—we're right back at the table with the same problem. Let's make a commitment to each one, and most importantly, to the American people, that, when we get done and come to an agreement, that we're not back at this problem 3, 4 years from now.

The President. I would like to add the words "merit" into any bill that's submitted because I think we should have merit-based immigration like they have in Canada, like they have in Australia. So we have people coming in that have a great track record, as opposed to what we're doing now, to be honest with you.

[Senator Perdue made brief remarks, concluding as follows.] But limiting this to the legal immigration side and combining the balance between various solutions on DACA; DREAMers, if it gets in the conversation; as well border security and chain migration, I think therein lies the balance of a good deal that can be done.

The President. Thank you, Lindsey. You know, it's very interesting, because I do have people that are—let's just to use a very common term—very far right and very far left. They're very unhappy about what we're doing, but I really don't believe they have to be, because I really think this sells itself. And you know, when you talk about comprehensive immigration reform, which is where I would like to get to eventually—if we do the right bill here, we are not very far way. You know, we've done most of it. If you want to know the truth, Dick? If we do this properly, DACA, you're not so far away from comprehensive immigration reform.

Rep. Hoyer. Mr. President, many of the things that are mentioned ought to be a part of the negotiations regarding comprehensive immigration reform.

Participant. We're not talking about comprehensive immigration.

Senator Dianne G. Feinstein. I would. As you know, we tried for comprehensive immigration reform in the Senate. It was on the floor, there were a number of amendments, it got a lot of attention in the Judiciary Committee, and then the House didn't take it up.

Sen. Feinstein. Well, I think if we have some meaningful comprehensive immigration reform, that's really where the security goes.

So I think, yes, we can make this happen. We all know it. We've done it before. You and I spent a long time—we did probably one of the most difficult things to do in California: water. And I believe we can get there, and we can just keep working each day on this. The President. I think what we're all saying is we'll do DACA and we can certainly start comprehensive immigration reform the following afternoon. Okay? We'll take an hour off, and then we'll start.

Sen. Perdue. In my opinion, we'll be right back here either 5 years, 30 years, whatever. But this, the chain migration, is so insidious; it is the fundamental flaw in the immigration policy of the United States. If any conversation about DACA is being held without that consideration—I agree with border security as well—but any conversation about that is not going to go anywhere in the United States Senate. And if we think we're going to divide one side versus the other, that's just not going to happen on this issue.

Sen. Perdue. Seventy percent of Americans want the immigration policy to be, the family—the nuclear family and the workers. Seventy percent.

The President. David, the chain immigration, though, has taken a very big hit in the last year with what's happening. I mean, you're looking at these killers—whether you like or not—we're looking at these killers, and then you see, 18 people came in, 22 people came in, 30 people came in, with this one person that just killed a lot of people. I really don't believe there are a lot of Democrats saying, "We're going to be supporting chain migration," anymore.

The President. That's okay. So I think that's why we make it a phase two. We do a phase one, which is DACA and security, and we do phase two, which is comprehensive immigration. And I think we should go right to it, I really do. We do one, and we then do the other. But we go right to it.

Sen. Hirono. And as the only immigrant serving in the United States Senate right now, I would like nothing better than for us to get to comprehensive immigration reform. But what I'm hearing around the table right now is a commitment to resolving the DACA situation, because there is a sense of urgency.

We're also making America safe again. Yesterday we had a bipartisan meeting with House Members and Senators on immigration reform, something they've been talking about for many, many years. But we brought them together in this room, and it was a tremendous meeting. Actually, it was reported as incredibly good. And my performance—you know, some of them called it a performance—I consider it work.

President Trump. No. It's got to include the wall. We need the wall for security. We need the wall for safety. We need the wall for stopping the drugs from pouring in. I would imagine that the people in the room, both Democrat and Republican, I really believe they're going to come up with a solution to the DACA problem—which has been going on for a long time—and maybe, beyond that, immigration as a whole.

Representative Ronald D. DeSantis. Well, Mr. President, you're tough on borders, everyone knows that. And when you think about the illegal immigration, which is obviously part of it—but this, this is why I think people elected you, because they knew that you were going to take this drug scourge seriously. It's taking a lot of American lives.

Wall Street Journal: Speaking of being flexible it sounds as if there's an immigration deal that has been struck amongst senators on the hill that's been sent to the White House for approval?

Wall Street Journal: On immigration—could you see yourself signing a bill....

Wall Street Journal: Is there a possibility that Donald Trump could sign a comprehensive immigration bill which would provide a path to legal status, citizenship for 11 million people who are here illegally?

When—on Tuesday you said that you supported the idea of signing comprehensive immigration reform...

So I just want to be crystal clear about this, you're open to discussing comprehensive immigration reform, are you open to discussing a path to citizenship as part of that?

The President: Ready? Comprehensive immigration reform is a far step from DACA. I am always open to discussing everything but that doesn't mean we're going to get anywhere close to getting it done.

The President: And I really believe they have good intention. After we're finished with DACA, assuming that gets done, I would certainly be open to discussing—you know, the comprehensive immigration. I don't know that we'll be able to make a deal on that one.

So we have a country that's on the right track. We're working on immigration and immigration reform, and hopefully, at some point, we'll be able to solve that problem. If the Democrats really wanted to, they could, but they really sometimes don't want to. But we're working on it, and we'll get it done one way or the other, I hope.

The President. No, he didn't say that. Well, I don't think—he didn't say it the way you would like him to say it. No, he didn't say that. He's doing a terrific job. We have a big immigration problem. You see what's happening; you see what's going on. And we have a big problem. We'll see if we can get it straightened out.

The President: We're going to see. If we make the right deal. I think they will. These are people that have very strong opinions on DACA and on immigration generally. And I happen to think they're largely right. Look, we're going to try and make a deal on DACA. We have a good chance of making it. What we need is we need the wall, we need security, we need security at the border. We have to stop the drugs from coming in. We need safety and we need a strong military.

Kernen: Well, we're going to have to end it there. I'm just — last question. Will we have another shutdown? Will you move more to the center on immigration ...

When it comes to terrorism, we will do whatever is necessary to protect our Nation. We will defend our citizens and our borders. We are also securing our immigration system, as a matter of both national and economic security. America is a cutting-edge economy, but our immigration system is stuck in the past. We must replace our current system of extended-family chain migration with a merit-based system of admissions that selects new arrivals based on their ability to contribute to our economy, to support themselves financially, and to strengthen our country.

The President: Because I know the British people and I understand the British people, and the British people wanted to have control over their country. And they don't want to have people coming from all over the world into Britain and they don't know anything about these people. And I said because of immigration, and to a certain extent because of trade, but mostly immigration, I said that Brexit is going to be a big upset and I was right.

We cover immigration. For many years—for many, many years—they've been talking immigration and never got anything done. We're going to get something done, we hope. It's got to be bipartisan, because the Republicans really don't have the votes to get it done in any other way. So it has to be bipartisan. But hopefully, the Democrats will join us, or enough of them will join us, so we can really do something great for DACA and for immigration, generally.
Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of American workers and American families. For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our most vulnerable communities. They've allowed millions of low-wage workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans. Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.

While we cannot imagine the depths of that kind of sorrow, we can make sure that other families never have to endure this kind of pain. Tonight I am calling on Congress to finally close the deadly loopholes that have allowed MS-13 and other criminal gangs to break into our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our immigration laws and support our ICE and Border Patrol agents—these are great people; these are great, great people—that work so hard in the midst of such danger so that this can never happen again.

Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an immigration reform package. In recent months, my administration has met extensively with both Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration reform. Based on these discussions, we presented Congress with a detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair compromise, one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our country gets the critical reforms it needs and must have.

The third pillar ends the visa lottery, a program that randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of American people. It's time to begin moving toward a merit-based immigration system, one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our country.

In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these programs present risks we can just no longer afford. It's time to reform these outdated immigration rules and finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century. These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise and one that will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system. For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen. Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that fulfills my ironclad pledge to sign a bill that puts America first. So let's come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job done.

We can deliver for our police, our veterans, and our brave servicemembers. And finally, after decades of waiting, we can finally pass immigration reform that protects our country, defends our borders, and modernizes our immigration rules to serve the needs of American workers and of American families. So important.

We want an immigration policy that's fair, equitable, but that's going to protect our people. We want people coming into our country based on merit and based on the fact that they are going to love our country, and they respect our people and our country. We don't want visa lottery. Pick a lottery ticket. Pick a lottery. We don't want that. So we want it based on merit.

We have a chance now to pass into law the immigration reforms that the American people have been demanding for decades and that many of you have been working on for your entire careers. We have a great opportunity as a Republican Party. As the Republican Party, we have a great opportunity. We're getting very little help from the Democrats, but I hope after I leave this room, we're going to get a call from these people saying, "Let's go."

As you know, I have put forward an immigration framework based on many months of meeting and working with Tom Cotton and working with John Cornyn, who was in the office the other day, and David Perdue—incredible people—and Bob Goodlatte, who's out here someplace. Really incredible people. And it's a strong bill, but it's a very fair bill. And it protects our borders. We have to protect our borders.

It includes reforms that are overwhelmingly popular with the voters, including Democrats. The Democrats want to have—the real Democrats, they want to have their borders protected. But it includes Democrats, Independents, Republicans. Americans want an immigration system that works for everybody. And they want safety.

Nearly 7 in 10 Americans support an immigration reform package that includes a permanent solution on DACA. I mean, I've been hearing about DACA for so many years. Some people call it DREAMers. It's not DREAMers. Don't fall into that trap. It's just much different than DREAMers. And I said the other night, you know, we have dreamers too. We have dreamers in this country too. You can't forget our dreamers. I have a lot of dreamers here.

We want something that is very, very tough and strong, in terms of the border. We need to end chain migration, and we need to cancel the terrible visa lottery. And those are the four pillars that I talked about the other night. We call them the White House framework, a plan that will finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century.

The Republican position on immigration is the center, mainstream view of the American people, with some extra strength at the border and security at the border added in. What we're asking for and what the American people are pleading for is sanity and common sense in our immigration system. We want immigration rules that protect our communities, defend our security, and admit people who will love our country and contribute to our society.

But make no mistake: I will not rest until we have delivered for the citizens of our great country so many different things—immigration, the strong military. We've done an awfully good job of protecting our Second Amendment. That was in question during the campaign, you remember, and we have done a very, very good job.

Thank you, everybody. Wow. Well, you know, Ronna and I, we won Michigan together. So I said, I think we have to keep her. And now look at the job she's doing. What a job. Thanks, Ronna. What a job. That's true, they're setting records. But we're going to set another kind of record, and that's making our great country so great again, so much better than it ever was: our military; our immigration situation, I think it has a chance.

Mr. President, I'd like to set the stage a little bit with our illegal activity numbers at the border from last year, which really tell the story of why we need to continue investing in border security, as well as closing the legal loopholes in our immigration system.

So we really believe these dual trends require investments both in smart border security, like a border wall system, but also closing the legal loopholes that we face in our immigration——

The officials here today each took an oath to defend his country or her country. As Congress considers immigration reforms, these are the most important voices for us to listen to, by far. These are the men and women that really know what's happening and that know how to keep America safe. They're real professionals. I was just with them. They're real professionals.

Acting Director Homan. And because of these loopholes, it continues to drive more illegal immigration. It entices more families and children to come.

Now, the Department of Justice—the Attorney General—is dedicating resources to this. He has announced the surging of hundreds of new U.S. attorneys to specifically focus on violent crimes in immigration. He has sent additional prosecutors to our southwest border. They were down there on detail to focus on an emphasis on enforcing immigration and criminal laws.

Acting Assistant Attorney General Cronan. When we don't enforce our immigration laws, MS-13 is able to just reconstitute its jailed members in the U.S. or released members in the—released from the U.S. with more members who are able to cross our borders.

During my State of the Union, I called on Congress to close the immigration loopholes that have allowed this deadly gang to break so easily into our country. My administration has identified three priorities. We went through and looked very closely. We've identified three priorities for creating a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system: securing the border, ending chain migration, and canceling the terrible visa lottery.

As Congress considers immigration reform, it's essential that we listen to the law enforcement professionals in this room today. And so I'm going to turn it over to Secretary Nielsen. We'll begin a discussion. And you folks might want to stay for a little while. Okay?

And that is why the Department of Justice, under the Attorney General's leadership, is also focused on stopping the flow of criminal aliens entering our country. The Attorney General has directed his prosecutors to renew their focus on immigration offenses, especially for offenders who have a nexus to gangs or drug cartels. The Attorney General has sent additional prosecutorial resources to the southwest border, and he has created border security coordinators in each United States attorneys' offices. They have been tasked with enforcing our immigration laws with a special emphasis on criminals like MS-13 with a nexus to the southwest border.

And we need these immigration laws changed if we're not going to—we're just not going to be able to continue to do this. They just come in so fast, so easy. And then, you have catch-and-release: You catch people, and you have to release them right away.

Not another country in the world has the stupidity of laws that we do when it comes to immigration. And if we don't get them changed—this isn't politics, this isn't Republican and Democrat. This is common sense. So it has to be taken care of. Okay.

The most important piece to any strategy in addressing MS-13 is collaboration, intelligence sharing, and immigration enforcement. Collaboration across the spectrum, across the continuum, with countries such as the Northern Triangle countries where we do have vetted teams of foreign national law enforcement officials working side to side with HSI and CBP in those countries.

Secretary Nielsen. Thank you. I'd like to turn it over to Director Cissna, who you've been hearing from a lot as we work to revise our immigration system. He's going to talk a little bit about the backlog and how that further exacerbates this problem.

United States Citizenship and Immigration Services Director L. Francis Cissna. So, Mr. President, there's—at the outset of your remarks, you talked about the four pillars of immigration reform that the administration is advancing right now: the getting rid of chain migration, getting rid of the visa lottery, border security, and some sort of DACA fix.

This issue of gangs attaches itself to each of those in a different way, and I think for border security, obviously. If the border is not secure, it's not just a question of border integrity or the integrity of our immigration laws, but as Agent Melendez just described, if these people are coming through because the border isn't secure, it harms public safety in the interior as well. It's all connected.

With respect to the other three, any immigration program that has little to no selectivity is going to potentially allow mala fide actors to come into the country if we're not watchful and if the law does not help us.

Rep. King. So this is something I would really ask to be addressed, that we vet those families that the kids are going with, and also stand with the police. We have the local, so-called "immigration advocates" who fight Angel every week—they fight ICE, they fight HSI, they fight the local police, they fight the FBI—claiming this is some kind of a plot to deport everyone.

Representative Martha E. McSally. Sir, thanks for the opportunity to be here, and thanks for your leadership in raising awareness on this dangerous gang and our broken immigration system and our failed border polices of the past.

During my State of the Union, I called on Congress to immediately close dangerous loopholes in Federal law that have endangered our communities and imposed enormous burdens on U.S. taxpayers. My administration has identified three major priorities for creating a safe, modern and lawful immigration system: fully securing the border, ending chain migration, and canceling the visa lottery. Chain migration is a disaster and very unfair to our country. The visa lottery is something that should have never been allowed in the first place. People enter a lottery to come into our country. What kind of a system is that?
But we have a pool of a hundred million people, a lot of whom want to work. We will also have a much more merit-based immigration policy, where we're going to bring in people that are going to be great workers, and they'll really fill up Foxconn and all of the places. Like, I was very instrumental in getting you Foxconn, as you know, and—through my friendships with that great company. And they're going to Wisconsin; it's going to be incredible. They're going to employ tremendous numbers of people. They're going to build one of the biggest plants in the world. So it's going to be very exciting.

Sen. Johnson. So I'm hoping, as part of this bipartisan process, that we actually fix our horribly broken legal immigration system so we do have the workers, and it has to be merit-based. So I ask my Democratic colleagues, please work with us, let's fix the DREAMer problem, but let's also fix our horribly broken legal immigration system. The President. Good. Thank you, Ron.

We're asking Congress to support our immigration policy that keeps terrorists, drug dealers, criminals, and gang members out of our country. We want them out. We don't want them in. And right now we're working on DACA, we're working on immigration bills, and we're making them tough so you people can enforce the laws—sometimes tough because of the laws you have to enforce.

That's why we're asking the Senators to support legislation that contains the three vital elements of a safe immigration system. So we're, right now, in the Senate. We're in Congress. Altogether, we'll see what happens with DACA.

Now, they don't like guns. You know why? They're not painful enough. These are animals. They cut people. They cut them. They cut them up in little pieces, and they want them to suffer. And we take them into our country, because our immigration laws are so bad. And when we catch them—it's called catch-and-release. We have to, by law, catch them and then release them. Catch-and-release. And I can't get the Democrats—and nobody has been able to for years—to approve commonsense measures that, when we catch these animal-killers, we can lock them up and throw away the keys.

Now, this was a rock-and-roll song—little amendments—a rock-and-roll song. But every time I do it, people—and you have to think of this in terms of immigration. We have to have great people come into our—I want people to come into our country. And I want people that are going to help us. And I don't want people that are going to come in and be accepting all of the gifts of our country for the next 50 years and do—and contribute nothing. I don't want that, and you don't want that.

So this is called "The Snake." And think of it in terms of immigration. And you may love it, or you may say, isn't that terrible. Okay? And if you say, isn't that terrible, who cares? Because the way they treat me—that's peanuts compared to the way they treat me. Okay? [Laughter] Immigration.

Mr. Prime Minister, I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate you on your immigration reforms and on Australia's commitment to merit-based immigration. Are my friends from Congress listening to that? Merit-based. We want to do merit-based immigration also. And we will. That really protects the interests of Australia and its people. It's the way to go, and you've been very successful with it. Here, we're working very hard to do the same. In that sense, we're going to hopefully follow in your footprints.

But we have to get immigration laws that allow us to do what we have to be able to do. They are so soft. No country in the world has immigration laws so soft like we do. So that's also a part of it.
And as a follow-up to that, if I may -- Mr. President, I know that you follow the development in Sweden closely, especially when it comes to immigration politics. Now that you've spent some time with our Prime Minister, how do you view Sweden in general? What is your take? And also, on our immigration politics? Thank you.
My administration submitted a balanced and responsible immigration reform plan to Congress. Our plan fully secures the border; provides a permanent solution to DACA, which we're really working on; and modernizes our immigration system by ending extended-family migration and the lottery system so we can eventually have a merit-based system where people can come in and work for your companies, work for you, and do a phenomenal job—a phenomenal job. People that love our country and that want to love our country and our people.

These reforms are supported by the vast majority of Latino voters. In fact, more than 8 in 10 Latino voters think immigration to our country should be based on skill, not just a relationship with people you don't even know. This is the mainstream view of all Americans, including Latinos. Yet the Senate Democrats filibustered our plan because they don't care about the immigration system or reform, and they don't want to solve the problem. They would rather use it to get elected. That's not working so well.

But we remain committed to immigration reform that protects our country, strengthens our economy, and lifts our workers from poverty to prosperity.

My fellow Americans, protecting the safety and well-being of American citizens is my highest duty as President. Yet lawless sanctuary jurisdictions are nullifying Federal law, obstructing immigration enforcement, and releasing thousands of criminal aliens into U.S. communities to prey on innocent victims. It's absolutely terrible.

And last week, the mayor of Oakland warned criminal aliens of a coming ICE enforcement action, giving them time to scatter and hide from authorities. The mayor's conduct directly threatened the safety of Federal immigration officers and the law-abiding Americans in her community.

Dangerous criminal and terrorist organizations relentlessly seek to exploit our immigration system. I've just come from a trip to the border, where I met with our wonderful border agents—Border Patrol and the ICE agents, unbelievable people—and reviewed prototypes of a new physical wall that will protect our border and protect our country. We don't have a choice in either. We need it for the drugs. We need it for the gangs. We need it for lots of reasons. We have to have it. It will be 99.5-percent successful. People won't be able to come over it. The drugs will stop, by a lot. Although, we have to get a lot tougher with drug dealers. Have to. But that wall will stop so much.

Sacramento, CA, County Sheriff Scott R. Jones. Good afternoon, Mr. President. Thank you for inviting me. Obviously, I'm at ground zero for the sanctuary State for California. You know, there's really two different issues that the sanctuary State addresses. And I'd be remiss if I didn't say that California law enforcement, we don't do immigration enforcement in the communities. We want people to have the comfort and confidence to call us if they need help. That's our primary mission. Although, that's the way it's portrayed, that we work arm-in-arm in the communities. We just don't do that. So that piece of it really doesn't affect law enforcement in California.

So we're not going to sweep it under the rug. This Department of Justice is going to back Kirstjen and Homeland Security and Tom and his ICE officers fully and totally. The Federal law is the supreme law of the land. It's been made clear by the Supreme Court that the Federal Government has immigration responsibility. And we're going to do our part, and we expect the cities and counties, if they're going to be partners with us, to participate with us.

Gwinnett County, GA, Sheriff R.L. "Butch" Conway. I'm Butch Conway, the Gwinnett County, Georgia, sheriff. We've cooperated with our partners with immigration in the 20-plus years I've been sheriff.

On issue after issue, House Democrats are way outside of the American mainstream. Nowhere in the Democrats' extremism—and nowhere can you see anything displayed more clearly than on immigration. A vote for House Democrats is truly a vote for open borders, people pouring into our country, pouring in. We have no idea who they are. They're coming in—open borders.
We're having a lot of companies come into the United States. We need workers. And by the way, illegal immigration—which will be probably one part of a question, but I'll give you the answer right now—we want people to come into our country, but we want them to come in based on merit. Because we're going to need these people because we have tremendous numbers of companies coming in, whether it's Chrysler leaving Mexico and coming into Michigan or Foxconn—you know, Foxconn is going to open up a tremendous place in Wisconsin, and we're very proud of that because that was a deal that nobody even thought was happening or could happen.

We are funding our Border Patrol agents and our ICE agents. They are working long hours under tremendously dangerous conditions. We're adding large numbers of immigration judges, high-quality judges. Not only are we adding them in the district court level and the Federal level of Court of Appeals, but we're adding immigration judges at a very high level.
Frankly, if we have had more Republican votes, we wouldn't have had to give away what we gave away, which many of the people in this room, including me, don't like. Because it was a waste, in many cases. But the Democrats want things. They don't want to focus on crime and borders and people pouring into our country, many of whom are not the people we want to come in. We want a merit-based immigration system. We want people to come in on merit, not based on a lottery; you pick a ticket.

President Trump. Well, we just began discussions. We are going to have a great relationship with Canada, maybe as good or better, hopefully, than ever before. We have some wonderful ideas on immigration. We have some, I think, very strong, very tough ideas on the tremendous problem that we have with terrorism. And I think when we put them all together, which will be very, very quickly—we have a group of very talented people—we will see some very, very obvious results. We're also doing some cross-border things that will make it a lot easier for trade and a lot better and a lot faster for trade.

Prime Minister Trudeau. One of the things we spoke about was the fact that security and immigration need to work very well together. And certainly, Canada has emphasized security as we look towards improving our immigration system and remaining true to the values that we have. And we had a very strong and fruitful discussion on exactly that.

At the same time, we continue to pursue our policies of openness towards immigration, refugees, without compromising security. And part of the reason we're—we have been successful in doing that over the past year—welcoming close to 40,000 Syrian refugees—is because we have been coordinating with our allies, the United States and around the world, to demonstrate that security comes very seriously to us. And that's something that we continue to deal with.

And, Prime Minister Trudeau, you've made very clear that Canada has an open-door policy for Syrian refugees. Do you believe that President Trump's moratorium on immigration has merit on national security grounds?

By stopping the flow of illegal immigration, we will save countless tax dollars, and that's so important because the tax—the dollars that we're losing are beyond anything that you can imagine. And the tax dollars that can be used to rebuild struggling American communities, including our inner cities. We are also going to save countless American lives. As we speak today, immigration officers are finding the gang members, the drug dealers, and the criminal aliens, and throwing them the hell out of our country. And we will not let them back in. They're not coming back in, folks. If they do, they're going to have bigger problems than they ever dreamt of.

My administration is also following through on our promise to secure, protect, and defend that border within our United States. Our southern border will be protected always. It will have the wall. Drugs will stop pouring in and poisoning our youth, and that will happen very, very soon. You're already seeing what's going on. The drugs are pouring into our country, folks. They are poisoning our youth and plenty of others, and we're going to stop it. We're not going to be playing games. Not going to be playing games. Following my Executive action—and don't forget, we've only been here for like, what, 50 days?—we've already experienced an unprecedented 40-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border; 61 percent—61 percent—since Inauguration Day—61 percent. Think of that.

We're also working, night and day, to keep our Nation safe from terrorism. We have seen the devastation from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino—hundreds upon hundreds of people from outside our country have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in the United States courts. Right now we have investigations going on all over; hundreds of refugees are under Federal investigation for terrorism and related reasons. We have entire regions of the world destabilized by terrorism and ISIS. For this reason, I issued an Executive order to temporarily suspend immigration from places where it cannot safely occur.

The President. The order he blocked was a watered-version of the first order that was also blocked by another judge and should have never been blocked to start with. This new order was tailored to the dictates of the Ninth Circuit's—in my opinion—flawed ruling. This is, in the opinion of many, an unprecedented judicial overreach. The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems—or she—or she. Fortunately, it will not be Hillary she. [Applause] When he or she deems it to be in the national interest of our country——

We also recognize that immigration security is national security. We must protect our citizens from those who seek to spread terrorism, extremism, and violence inside our borders. Immigration is a privilege, not a right, and the safety of our citizens must always come first, without question.

Migration, immigration, integration has to be worked on, obviously. Traffickers have to be stopped. But this has to be done while looking at the refugees as well, giving them opportunities to shape their own lives where they are; help countries who right now are not in an ability to do so, sometimes because they have civil war. I think that's the right way of going about it. And this is obviously what we have an exchange of views about, but my position is the one that I have just set out for you.

And Attorney General Sessions is putting our priorities into action. He's going after the drug dealers who are peddling their poison all over our streets and destroying our youth. He's going after the gang members who threaten our children. And he's fully enforcing our immigration laws in all 50 States. And you know what? It's about time.

You know, they're trying to use this number against us because we've done so unbelievably at the borders already. They're trying to use it against us. But you need that wall to stop the human trafficking, to stop the drugs, to stop the wrong people. You need the wall. But listen to this: We've already seen a 73 percent decrease—never happened before—in illegal immigration on the southern border since my election—73 percent.

And the world is getting the message. They know that our border is no longer open to illegal immigration and that if you try to break in, you'll be caught, and you'll be returned to your home. You're not staying any longer. And if you keep coming back illegally after deportation, you will be arrested, prosecuted, and you will put behind bars. Otherwise, it will never end.

Let's also remember that immigration security is national security. We've seen the attacks from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino. Hundreds of individuals from other countries have been charged with terrorism-related offenses in the United States.

The Prime Minister and I just finished a productive discussion about the interests of our two countries. Together we discussed crucial issues ranging from national security to trade, to immigration and enhanced economic cooperation. We reaffirmed the tremendous friendship between the United States and Australia and the vital importance of our security and our alliance.

One by one, we are keeping the promises I made to American people during my campaign for President, whether it's cutting job-killing regulations; appointing and confirming a tremendous Supreme Court Justice, putting in place tough new ethics rules, achieving a record reduction in illegal immigration on our southern border, or bringing jobs, plants, and factories back into the United States at numbers which no one until this point thought even possible. And believe me, we've just begun. The fruits of our labor will be seen very shortly even more so.
And we're achieving these goals by eliminating these job-killing regulations, unlocking American energy, rebuilding our military, pursuing fair and reciprocal trade deals, achieving massive reductions in illegal immigration, transforming the Department of Veterans Affairs, and building a new partnership among nations to defeat terrorism, which we have to do.

Secretary of Homeland Security John F. Kelly. Mr. President, proud to be here. Certainly very proud to represent the quarter of a million men and women that serve the country in DHS. In the 5 months that I've been in the job, we have gone a long way to facilitate the—improve the legal movement of people and commerce across our borders and, yet at the same time, have gone a long way to safeguarding our borders, particularly the southern border, working with all of our partners to the South. A 70-percent drop in illegal immigration. While we still welcome legal immigrants to the tune of over a million a year, we are no longer a friendly environment for illegal border crosses.

We're joined by the chairman of the House Judiciary, Bob Goodlatte, a friend of mine for a long time. Bob is one of the most skilled legislators in Congress—and you didn't even tell me to say that, Bob, right—[laughter]—and he's worked with law enforcement to write a series of critical immigration bills that will close the dangerous loopholes exploited by criminals, gang members, drug dealers, killers, terrorists.

You lost the people that you love because our Government refused to enforce our Nation's immigration laws. And that's even the existing immigration laws, without new laws. That's existing immigration laws. For years, the pundits, journalists, politicians in Washington refused to hear your voices, but on election day, 2016, your voices were heard all across the entire world. Right? You'd better believe it. Nobody died in vain, I can tell you.

Chairman Goodlatte has produced a package of truly key immigration enforcement bills. We've been waiting for these for a long time, and I want to thank you, Chairman, for doing that. Great job. And it's just perfect.

This package includes the Davis-Oliver Act, whose passage I called for nearly a year ago at my Inauguration speech and immigration speech—both—the immigration speech taking place in Phoenix, Arizona. The Davis-Oliver Act was named for Detective Michael Davis and Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver, who were gunned down in the line of duty by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record and two prior deportations. And everybody knew this person was big, big trouble, and they begged law enforcement to get him out. And they were unable to do that.

These beautiful American lives were stolen because our Government refused to do its job. If the Government had simply enforced our immigration laws, these Americans would still be alive today. That's why, since the day I took the oath of office, I have been restoring the enforcement of our immigration laws and the protection and defense of our borders.

The most sacred duty of government is to protect the lives of its citizens, and that includes securing our borders and enforcing our immigration laws.

The people of Arizona know the deadly and heartbreaking consequences of illegal immigration: the lost lives, the drugs, the gangs, the cartels, the crisis of smuggling and trafficking. MS-13—we're throwing them out so fast, they never got thrown out of anything like this. We are liberating towns out on Long Island. We're liberating. Can you imagine, in this day and age—in this day and age, in this country—we are liberating towns? This is like from a different age. We are taking these people. They don't shoot people, because it's too fast and not painful. They cut them up into little pieces. These are animals. We are getting them out of here. We're throwing them in jails, and we're throwing them out of the country. We're liberating our towns. You've seen it. You've lived it. And you elected me to put a stop to it. And we are doing a phenomenal job of putting a stop to it. That I can tell you.

After years of defending other countries' borders—can you believe we fight for other countries? We want to defend their borders—we're finally defending our own borders, and we're showing compassion for the struggling American workers who are now starting to see the light, because plants are coming pouring back into our country. And by the way, we're doing a lot of good work on that. But a lot of people are coming back in. We have Foxconn; they make the iPhones, as you know, for Apple. And so many companies are building now in our country, including the auto companies who are coming back. Years of uncontrolled immigration have placed enormous pressure on the jobs and wages of working families, and they've put great burdens on local schools and hospitals. While this may be good for a handful of special interests, it's unfair to working people of all backgrounds, all throughout our country. We want every American community to succeed, including our immigrant communities, but they can't do that if we don't control our borders.

But during that visit, I heard firsthand from the frontline agents about the security threats they confront each and every day, and I pledge my continued resolve to them—and all of you—to keep our country safe. All around the Nation, I have spent time with the wonderful Americans whose children were killed for the simple reason that our Government failed to enforce our immigration laws, already existing laws. And I promised these families, the deaths of their loved ones will not have been in vain. I promised them. I know so many of them.

And that wall is also going to help us, very importantly, with the drug problem and the massive amounts of drugs that are pouring across the southern border. My administration will never back down in demanding immigration control. The American people voted for immigration control. That's one of the reasons I'm here. And that is what the American people deserve, and they're going to get it. So you put pressure. But believe me, one way or the other, we're going to get that wall.

We also understand that immigration security is a national—it's really a national treasure, but it's a national security. We need national security for safety. We're going to keep radical Islamic terrorists out of our country. Sorry. Sorry. Call up some of the other countries in the world, say, "How you doing, folks?" Not so good.
We're creating an immigration system that puts American workers and American families first. We're moving quickly to pass a massive tax cut and simplification for the middle class. We want new tax returns. We want simplification. We want reform. And you know what we really want? We want massive tax cuts. That's what we're doing for business. That's what we're doing for the middle class.
Insurers are fleeing. Doctors are quitting. Choices are disappearing. Congress must do its job by ending the Obamacare nightmare. So, so, to deliver for American families, we are also working to pass the RAISE Act, legislation that would end chain migration and switch our country to a merit-based immigration system. Merit, merit, merit. People that will help our country. People that will help our country.
We have Tom Cotton. We have David Perdue. Two great Senators. And they're working on it. The RAISE Act would keep new immigrations from going on welfare for 5 years.
The President. Isn't that nice? They don't walk over and say, I'm going on welfare. Isn't that nice? Maybe keep them from ever going on welfare. And would require them to support themselves and their families financially. It's time to create an immigration system that serves the interests of the United States of America.
Before we begin, I want to make a very brief announcement. I had an excellent meeting today with Chairman Grassley and other lawmakers on immigration reform. Following the terrorist attack in New York, I'm calling on Congress to immediately terminate the Diversity Visa Lottery Program. It's a disaster for our country.
In sanctuary States and cities, innocent Americans are at the mercy of criminal aliens because state and local officials defy Federal authorities and obstruct the enforcement of our immigration laws.

We mourn for all of the American families, of all backgrounds, who will have any empty seat at Christmas this year because our immigration laws were not enforced. No American should be separated from their loved ones because of preventable crime committed by those illegally in our country. Our cities should be sanctuaries for Americans, not for criminal aliens.

Unfortunately, Democrats in Congress not only oppose our efforts to stop illegal immigration and crack down on sanctuary cities, now they are demanding amnesty as a condition for funding the Government, holding troop funding hostage and putting our national security at risk. We cannot allow it.

For decades now, U.S. immigration rules have been based on an outdated system known as chain migration. Under chain migration, foreign nationals can come to the United States and bring in unlimited numbers of foreign relatives. A single immigrant can begin a chain that could ultimately bring in dozens of increasingly distant relations.

Because these individuals are admitted solely on the basis of family ties—not skill or not merit—most of this immigration is lower skilled, putting great strain on Federal welfare. And because there is no real selection criteria, the current system is totally incompatible with national security.

It is time to create a merit-based immigration system that makes sense for a modern economy, selecting new arrivals based on their ability to support themselves financially and to make positive contributions to U.S. society. Base it on love of our country. We want people that come in that can love our country.

This process begins with Congress passing a bill to end chain migration and also end the visa lottery. I have called on Congress to do exactly that. Ending chain migration and also ending the visa lottery will allow us to have commonsense immigration rules that promote assimilation and wage growth. It also promotes, most importantly, safety. It'll help Americans, both old and new, to thrive, flourish, and prosper.

And over the profound objections of the American people, our politicians left our borders wide open. Millions of immigrants entered illegally. Millions more were admitted into our country without the proper vetting needed to protect our security and our economy. Leaders in Washington imposed on the country an immigration policy that Americans never voted for, never asked for, and never approved, a policy where the wrong people are allowed into our country and the right people are rejected. American citizens, as usual, have been left to bear the cost and to pick up the tab.

The President: Because I know the British people and I understand the British people, and the British people wanted to have control over their country. And they don't want to have people coming from all over the world into Britain and they don't know anything about these people. And I said because of immigration, and to a certain extent because of trade, but mostly immigration, I said that Brexit is going to be a big upset and I was right.

But we have a pool of a hundred million people, a lot of whom want to work. We will also have a much more merit-based immigration policy, where we're going to bring in people that are going to be great workers, and they'll really fill up Foxconn and all of the places. Like, I was very instrumental in getting you Foxconn, as you know, and—through my friendships with that great company. And they're going to Wisconsin; it's going to be incredible. They're going to employ tremendous numbers of people. They're going to build one of the biggest plants in the world. So it's going to be very exciting.

Sen. Johnson. So I'm hoping, as part of this bipartisan process, that we actually fix our horribly broken legal immigration system so we do have the workers, and it has to be merit-based. So I ask my Democratic colleagues, please work with us, let's fix the DREAMer problem, but let's also fix our horribly broken legal immigration system. The President. Good. Thank you, Ron.

We are funding our Border Patrol agents and our ICE agents. They are working long hours under tremendously dangerous conditions. We're adding large numbers of immigration judges, high-quality judges. Not only are we adding them in the district court level and the Federal level of Court of Appeals, but we're adding immigration judges at a very high level.
And that's already—we have the worst immigration laws in the history of mankind. We're slowly getting them changed. We want to make it quick. So give me some reinforcements please. OK? [applause] 
So we're building the wall but we're—we're getting it all done. We're going to get rid of catch and release. We're going to get rid of—we're going to get rid of the lottery system. We're going to go eventually—when I get the votes. I need Republicans. We're going to go eventually to a merit-based system of immigration. Merit. You come in on merit. [applause] 
If I might, I just wanted to make a brief statement on immigration and what's happening. And I'll say it very honestly, and I'll say it very straight: Immigration is the fault—and all of the problems that we're having—because we cannot get them to sign legislation; we cannot get them even to the negotiating table. And I say it's, very strongly, the Democrats' fault. They're obstruction—they're really obstructionists. And they are obstructing.
We could have an immigration bill. We could have—child separation, we're stuck with these horrible laws. They're horrible laws. What's happening is so sad, is so sad. And it can be taken care of quickly, beautifully, and we'll have safety.
This could really be something very special. It could be something maybe even for the world to watch, just like they're watching our great economy, how it's soaring. They could watch this. We have the worst immigration laws in the entire world. Nobody has such sad, such bad, and actually, in many cases, such horrible and tough. You see about child separation; you see what's going on there.
But just remember, a country without borders is not a country at all. We need borders. We need security. We need safety. We have to take care of our people. You take a look at the death and destruction that's been caused by people coming into this country, without going through a process. We want a merit-based immigration system so that Boeing and Lockheed and all of the people—Grumman—all of the people that are here today, the heads of every company, so that you can hire people on a merit-based—you know they're coming in—they're people that came on merit, not based on a lottery or not people that snuck across the border. And they could be murderers and thieves and so much else.
We're meeting right now on immigration. And we are very strong at the border; we're very strong on security. We want security for our country. The Republicans want security and insist on security for our country, and we will have that. At the same time, we have compassion. We want to keep families together; it's very important. I'll be signing something in a little while that's going to do that. And the people in this room want to do that, and they're working on various pieces of legislation to get it done. But I'll be doing something that's somewhat preemptive, but ultimately, will be matched by legislation, I'm sure.

We have record-setting numbers in every way economically, but we want to solve this immigration problem, which is going on for 40 years—more. It's been going on forever. And we want to see if we can solve it. So we are canceling or postponing the Congressional Picnic tomorrow.

Sen. Sullivan. On the issue of immigration, trade, and investment, these are all areas where Congress has a lot of authority under the Constitution, and you have authority; the executive branch has authority under the Constitution. And I think that's why meetings like this are really important, bringing the leadership on both sides together, because they're important issues. So appreciate the opportunity to let you see our views, hear our views on these issues, where we share authority on important matters. Thank you.

Sen. Alexander. Mr. President, thanks for having us. I think what Dan said was good. We really have—on the issues, on trade, on immigration—we have a partnership under the Constitution. We have some authority; the President has some authority. We need to work together.

And when we were here a year ago, I think I suggested to you that immigration, which has bedeviled us for 40 years, as you've said—I believe you can—you're the President who can help us solve the immigration problem with your leadership. You may be able to do for immigration what Nixon did for China and Reagan did for the Soviet Union. And a lot of us would like to work with you on that.

Senator Thomas B. Cotton. I think it's very important that we protect our border. We cannot allow a child to be a "get out of jail free" card and a "get into the U.S. free" ticket. But at the same time, as you've said—as we've all said—we'd like to keep families together, keep them together at the border for the orderly and timely processing of the adult's immigration claim. If it's a lawful, legitimate claim, we can admit the family into the country. If not, they'll have to go back to their home country.

Senator Lindsey O. Graham. We've got a big massive mess that's been going on for decades, and we're all going to fix it one day, I hope. But we've got a specific problem that puts the country in a dilemma. Here's your dilemma and President Obama's dilemma, our dilemma: If a family shows up at the border and we let the family go into the country, and say, "Please come back for your hearing," about 80 percent of the time, the adults never show up for the hearing. I think most Americans feel like that is bad; it will create a third wave of illegal immigration.

Sen. Hoeven. Thanks for inviting up on these important issues and for having this important discussion certainly on immigration, but also on trade. And the context that I want to make sure we talk about is, we've made incredible progress on tax relief, we've made tremendous progress on regulatory relief, and it's reflected in our economy. Now, if we can do the same thing on trade, think what that means for our country in terms of economic growth, in terms of jobs, in terms of getting wages moving higher, and the impact that has for all Americans.

Senator John Cornyn III. Mr. President, to your point, America is the most generous country in the world when it comes to legal immigration. And I think we ought to draw a very clear line between legal immigration that benefits our country——

Sen. Cornyn. ——and illegal immigration, which is a threat to public safety.

So we came at a time when there were plenty of problems to solve, and one of the big problems is immigration. And I hope that within not too long a distance—and I mean beyond just one problem of immigration. You can mention the word "comprehensive," or you don't have to use it. A lot of politicians don't like the word "comprehensive immigration reform." But I really think we have an opportunity to do the whole immigration picture, and that's what I'm looking to do, ultimately. But right now we want to fix this problem, and I think we'll be able to do that.

But what the President reiterated again yesterday, and he has said every day from when he sought this office, is we have a crisis of illegal immigration. And as the President made clear, we don't want families to be separated. We don't want children taken away from parents. But right now, under the law—and we sit with these lawmakers—we only have two choices before us: Number one is, don't prosecute people who come into our country illegally, or prosecute them; and then, under court cases and the law, they have to be separated from their children.

And I would say, with great respect to the Members of Congress, as the House considers legislation tomorrow and the Senate is considering legislation, the President has postponed the Congressional Picnic—we're calling on Congress to act. Let's roll our sleeves up, let's work the whole problem. Let's end this crisis of illegal immigration.

We are going to see if we can solve the immigration problem like we've solved so many other problems. And I think we'll get it done.

So the military is taken care of. We want to have a very strong border. As you know, I signed an Executive order this morning letting families stay together. The laws are horrible. We have the weakest, most pathetic immigration laws anywhere in the world. Nobody has laws like we do.

Mexico—which makes over a hundred billion dollars a year with us—but we're changing that—Mexico, with the NAFTA deal, makes a fortune. They have very powerful immigration laws. They could stop the immigration on the spot, but they choose not to do it. I made them do it with respect to the caravan from 3 weeks ago, where 2,000 people started and about 100 people got through. But they could stop. They make—they have a 2,000-mile journey up Mexico. Mexico doesn't stop the people. Well, we're not going to put up with it, and I'm going to make it a part of NAFTA that they have to.

And you will—you've seen a big difference already in Minnesota. Tremendous difference. A lot of things have happened. Incredible things have happened having to do with immigration in Minnesota since we got in.

You know, ICE is the one. These are tough people. And you have to be tough. And when they have a problem with MS-13 gangs and all of these others that came in through these horrible and weak immigration laws that, Shelley, we're strengthening up—we're going to get them done. We need tough laws. We need fair laws.

We also recognize the vital importance of border security and immigration control. In order to prevent foreign acts of terrorism within our shores, we must prevent terrorists and their supporters from gaining admission in the first place. Border security is a national security problem. And in the United States, we are working very hard to get the Democrats to give us a couple of votes so we can pass meaningful and powerful border security.

It's a very sad situation. It's very unfortunate. But I do not think it's good for Europe, and I don't think it's good for our country. We're, as you know, far superior to anything that's happened before, but we have very bad immigration laws, and we're—I mean, we're doing incredibly well considering the fact that we virtually don't have immigration laws. We have laws that are so bad, I don't even call them laws. I call them—it's just like, you just walk across the border. You walk across the border—you put one foot on the land and now you're tied up in a lawsuit for 5 years. It's the craziest thing anyone has ever seen.

Prime Minister May. The U.K. has a proud history of welcoming people who are fleeing persecution to our country. We have a proud history of welcoming people who want to come to our country to contribute to our economy and contribute to our society. And over the years, overall, immigration has been good for the U.K. It's brought people with different backgrounds, different outlooks here to the U.K. and has—and we've seen them contributing to our society and to our economy.

And the reason I felt it was going to happen was because of immigration. Because I know—I think one of the reasons I got elected was because of immigration, and I felt that Brexit had the upper hand. And most people didn't agree with me. If you remember, Barack Obama said, well, that your country will have to get on the back of the line if that happened, which I thought was a terrible thing to say, frankly.

Catch-and-release. How about that one? You catch a criminal, you take his name, and then you release him. He's got to show up to court within 4 or 5 years. [Laughter] In the meantime, they're committing crime in our country. These are the laws we have to work with. And despite that, we're setting records, but we have horrible, horrible immigration laws, and we're going to get them fixed. You've got to vote Republican, folks. You've got to vote Republican.

Like the United States, Italy is currently under enormous strain as a result of illegal immigration. And they fought it hard. And the Prime Minister, frankly, is with us today because of illegal immigration. Italy got tired of it. They didn't want it any longer.

The Prime Minister and I are united in our conviction that strong nations must have strong borders. We have a solemn obligation to protect our citizens and their quality of life. My administration is working hard to pass border security legislation, improve vetting, and establish a merit-based immigration system, which the United States needs very, very importantly, very badly.

As far as the border is concerned—and personally, if we don't get border security, after many, many years of talk within the United States—I would have no problem doing a shutdown. It's time we had proper border security. We're the laughingstock of the world. We have the worst immigration laws anywhere in the world.

Thirdly, in terms of immigration, I also described to President Trump the innovative approach that Italy has put forth. And the European Union now has a responsibility to not leave the weight of the management of immigration on the shoulders of the countries of first arrival, like Italy is.

And as you heard President Trump say, we appreciate this contribution which is provided by the Italian Government, which is providing fruit—good results. We are talking about an approach—a multilevel approach—in order to try to resolve the phenomenon of immigration, not because of an emergency, but because this is a structural approach. I want to underline, this is in line with the position of President Trump, which goes from the respect and dignity of people to make sure that fundamental rights are protected, and it wants to make sure that these rights aren't trampled over, because these people are in the hands of criminal bands.

President Trump. I'll always leave room for negotiation. But this has been many years; this isn't just Trump administration. We're new. This has been many years, even decades. We have immigration laws. We have border security. We have all sorts of things going on that are—it's disgraceful. We are doing a phenomenal job. We're setting records. But we have laws that don't work. So we're working around those laws, and it's unfortunate.

Republicans stand for stopping illegal immigration, fixing horrible trade deals, cutting your taxes in a major, major way, biggest tax cut in the history of our country. And in addition to that, we've got ANWR. You know what that is, right, in Alaska? They've been trying to get that approved for 50 years. We got it approved. It's part of that plan.
The new President had conversation and it was terrific. I think we're going to have a very good relationship. We'll see. We'll see. We want help on the border because we have the worst immigration laws in the history of mankind or womankind. We have horrible, horrible immigration laws, so we want help. But we've come to a conclusion with Mexico. Canada has taken advantage of our country for a long time. We love Canada. We love it. Love the people of Canada. But they are in a position that's not a good position for Canada. They cannot continue to charge us 300-percent tariff on dairy products, and that's what they're doing.

The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance for human struggling and human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It's a horrible thing that's going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It's very, very cruel. Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs, and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hard-working citizens, and has produced a vicious cycle of crime, violence, and poverty. Only by upholding national borders, destroying criminal gangs, can we break this cycle and establish a real foundation for prosperity.
We recognize the right of every nation in this room to set its own immigration policy in accordance with its national interests, just as we ask other countries to respect our own right to do the same, which we are doing. That is one reason the United States will not participate in the new Global Compact on Migration. Migration should not be governed by an international body unaccountable to our own citizens. Ultimately, the only long-term solution to the migration crisis is to help people build more hopeful futures in their home countries. Make their countries great again. [Laughter]
The President. Yes, well, we have—Mexico has really stepped up to the plate, which is very nice. I've said to them, "Look, you know"—we've been very nice to Mexico. We have the worst immigration laws in the history of the world. They're incompetent. And in fact, we have a great Democrat here; maybe we could negotiate some immigration laws while you're here? [Laughter]
The United States will continue to deny terrorists any funding, territory, support, or means of infiltrating our country. In this effort, we understand that immigration security is a national security; it's about security as a whole. And that includes our borders that you've been reading so much about over the last long period of time, but especially over the last 2 weeks.

Republicans know that the rule of law is essential to national sovereignty. And we know that immigration enforcement is essential to public safety, national security, and the protection of American jobs, wages, and public benefits. You know that.
They want to sign illegal aliens up for free healthcare, free welfare, free education and the right to vote. Otherwise, they don't get much. Illegal immigration cost American tax payers more than $100 billion every single year, more than 20 times the entire state budget of the state of West Virginia.
Democrat immigration policies not only drain our treasury, but they threaten our communities. Nearly 100 percent of heroin in the United States enters though the Sothern border, along with roughly 90 percent of cocaine, the majority of meth, and a substantial portion of the ultra-lethal fentanyl-killing-a-youth drug, fentanyl--the worst.
America is being respected again. We're respected as a country again. We were not respected for a long time.  [applause] We were laughed at just like these stupid immigration laws. The whole world looks at it, they laugh, they said what is this all about? A person comes into our country--another country throws them out. Hey, get out. You're not supposed to be here, you have to go through a process.
Nowhere is this cooperation more important than when it comes to enforcing our Nation's immigration laws. You've been reading a lot about immigration, haven't you, folks? But we're getting it. We're really getting it. We're being strong on the border. We could use a little help, but we're being strong on the border. A lot of brave people are working with us on the border.

Unfortunately, there are extreme politicians in cities and States around America—I'm sure you haven't heard about this—who have issued policies to forbid their police departments from working with Federal immigration authorities. Hard to believe, isn't it? These outrageous sanctuary cities are grave threats to public safety and national security. Each year, sanctuary cities release thousands of known criminal aliens from their custody and right back into the community. So they put them in, and they have them, and they let them go, and it drives you people a little bit crazy, doesn't it, huh? But it's changing. It's all changing.

Illegal immigration is a threat to the well-being of every American community, threatening innocent families, overwhelming public resources, and draining the Federal treasury. Congress must fully fund border security in the year-ending funding bill. We have to get this done. They're playing games. They're playing political games. I actually think the politics of what they're doing is very bad for them, but we're going to very soon find out. Maybe I'm not right, but usually, I'm right. Like I said, "I'm going to win for President." [Laughter] And some people said, "That won't happen." And guess what? Look who's up here now, folks. [Laughter]

As President, nothing is more important than protecting the security of our Nation and its citizens. So to every Federal law enforcement officer who is on the frontlines of that mission—to the U.S. marshals, ATF agents, immigration officers, FBI, DEA, and all State and local authorities who proudly wear this incredible uniform—it's really the uniform of our country—I say, "Keep up the great work." You know that my administration will always have your back. We will never ever let you down.

The United States needs a physical barrier, needs a wall, to stop illegal immigration and to halt deadly inflow of drugs and crime. You have human traffickers. It's a thing that's horrible. Think of it: human trafficking. They kidnap people, they steal people, and they sell people. And because of the internet, one of the bad things that happens with the internet—one of the many bad things—but because of the internet, it's the highest it's ever been in history. And this is a world problem. This isn't a United States situation; this is a world problem.

If you look at Israel—I was with Prime Minister Netanyahu, and he threw up his hands; he said, "I don't understand why they fight you on the wall." In Israel, as you know, they built a wall. He said 99.9 percent, it works. And it would with us too. It would work almost a hundred percent of the time, and we'd have much less of a problem. And we'd save money—so much money—on a monthly basis. Probably, it would pay for itself in a month or two. Because we lose pretty close to $250 billion on illegal immigration. And I would say that it could be on a monthly, or a couple of months, it would pay for the wall, pay for what we're talking about.

Secretary of Homeland Security Kirstjen M. Nielsen. Sure. Good afternoon, Mr. President. So I'm in San Diego reviewing our border security and immigration efforts.

But the system itself is simply overwhelmed. This is my 17th—around 17th trip—to the border in the last year. And I can tell you, unfortunately, the crisis is getting worse. Our immigration system is simply badly broken.

We need Congress to fund the wall, fund the Government, and close the loopholes in our laws. If Congress wants to have catch-and-release at the border and more drugs, gangs, and crime to come into our country, it can continue to refuse to provide the funds that we need to build the wall, and it can continue to refuse to close the loopholes in our immigration laws. That is the choice here, sir. The President. That's great, Matt. And thank you very much. So true. And you mentioned one thing about courts—and I know you're hiring judges—but we're one of the only countries that anybody knows of where if you step one foot into our country, you now have a court case. Other countries, you step a foot, and they say "Get out." They put you out or worse. With our country, if you're able to put a foot onto our land, basically, that's what catch-and-release is, or even beyond that. But now you end up with lawyers and judges and things. It's so ridiculous.

All they need to do is come and sit down with you, Mr. President. I know where your heart it. I know where the people around this table's heart is. We're ready to find a solution to this issue of illegal immigration, of drug trafficking, of potential terrorist activity along that southern border. And we've got the expertise. All we need is the will from Congress to come. And we'll be more than happy to partner up with them and find a solution to this.

Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex M. Azar II. Sure, Mr. President. Thank you very much, and thank you for your strong leadership and the efforts to secure our borders and fix our terribly broken immigration system.

The President. Right. Well, I'd rather not say it. Could we do it for a little bit less? It's so insignificant compared to what we're talking about. You know, I've heard numbers as high as $275 billion we lose on illegal immigration. And here, you have a wall where you're talking about, to complete—because again, a lot has already been done. You know, we've been getting money in. Somebody said that we didn't spend the money. Well, we have spent it, but we don't pay contractors before they finish the job. That's one of the other things that Pat and I sort of instituted. We like to have people do the work.

The President. No, because I think Supreme Court—no, I think this should be settled. By the way, if the Supreme Court would do a great favor to this country, if they would say "the President should not have done that," we will settle this whole thing, including, really, a big immigration policy, not just border security, which is very important, because we would do something with DACA. A lot of the Republicans—most Republicans are fine with some deal on DACA. DACA is okay. These are people that have been in the country a long time. In many cases, they don't even speak the language of the country from which their parents came.

What happened is, when a judge incredibly—because it was an incredibly, I will say, wrong decision. In fact, President Obama, when he signed the DACA with the Executive order, made a statement to the effect, this isn't going to work. And some judge from the Ninth Circuit—here we go again—upheld it. And then, it was upheld by the Ninth Circuit appellate, and now it's going before the United States Supreme Court. And hopefully, that will be properly adjudicated. Because if it is, talks will begin on larger immigration matters having to do with DACA, having to do with other things.

And, Mr. President, I promise you, as you promised the Republican and Democrat leaderships today, that we will work earnestly over the weekend. We will work in good faith. The American people deserve nothing less. And we enter this weekend and these discussions hopeful, again, not simply that we will end a budget shutdown, but that we will make, finally, meaningful progress on securing our southern border to prevent the flow of narcotics, human trafficking, illegal immigration that has so beset our country now for more than a generation. And with the President's leadership and direction, we'll hope to accomplish just that.

This is a humanitarian crisis, a crisis of the heart and a crisis of the soul. Last month, 20,000 migrant children were illegally brought into the United States, a dramatic increase. These children are used as human pawns by vicious coyotes and ruthless gangs. One in three women are sexually assaulted on the dangerous trek up through Mexico. Women are—children are the biggest victims, by far, of our broken system. This is the tragic reality of illegal immigration on our southern border. This is the cycle of human suffering that I am determined to end.
The proposal from Homeland Security includes cutting-edge technology for detecting drugs, weapons, illegal contraband, and many other things. We have requested more agents, immigration judges, and bed space to process the sharp rise in unlawful migration fueled by our very strong economy. Our plan also contains an urgent request for humanitarian assistance and medical support.
Over the last several years, I've met with dozens of families whose loved ones were stolen by illegal immigration. I've held the hands of the weeping mothers and embraced the grief-stricken fathers. So sad. So terrible. I will never forget the pain in their eyes, the tremble in their voices, and the sadness gripping their souls.
In a few moments, the American people will hear directly from our frontline border agents about the tremendous flood of illegal immigration, drug trafficking, human trafficking—a phenomena that has been going on for a thousand years or more, and that you'd think was something that modern society wouldn't have. And I hate to tell you that because of the internet, it's worse than ever before. Human trafficking, it's a horrible thing. And much of it comes—it's a world problem, not a U.S. problem only.

We need the wall. And when I say we need the wall, I don't mean just build the wall. There's other things that we need to do also. We need to enforce immigration laws. We need tougher judges. We need the wall itself. Our Border Patrol agents need to have what they should have—the equipment, the materials they need to do their job.

And you know, we are set up as a country to deal with legal immigration. We applaud legal immigration. But illegal immigration, particularly when it floods over here, we're just not prepared for, especially with these large caravans. And it's created a humanitarian crisis that these men and women, who are local elected officials, have had to deal with.

We could also do a much more major form of immigration reform, and I'd look forward to doing that, along with many other people at the table, including our Vice President. And we look very much forward to moving on that. But first, we have to get a barrier, because it all doesn't work without protection.

But this is one of the easy votes they'll ever have. It's very simple. And then, we go on to major reform on immigration. And I look forward to that, because after 50 years of talking about it, they should have done it.

Congress has to do its duty, and the Democrats have to help us. They have to come back to Washington, and they have to vote for border security. They have to vote for safety. It's national security too. They have to come back, and they have to vote. It will take us 15 minutes, and then we're going to get on to much bigger immigration reform, because we should do that. We should do that.

The crisis of illegal immigration impacts all Americans, threatening public safety, overwhelming public resources, straining our local schools and hospitals, undermining U.S. workers, and claiming countless innocent lives. And I will tell you, I want people to come into our country, but they have to come in legally. They have to come in through a process. [Applause] Thank you.

We need security at our southern border. Drugs flow in. Tremendous percentages of the drugs coming into our country come from the southern border. We're not going to allow it to happen. And that is why our Homeland Security professionals have asked Congress for a steel barrier between the ports of entry; to fund more agents, beds, medical supplies, and technology; and to close the ridiculous and dangerous immigration loopholes that no country in the world has but us.

We must also recognize that immigration security is national security, and that foreign fighters must not gain access into our nations. We've been extremely tough on people that we think can be in any way working with—or even be a part of—radical Islamic terror. I've been very, very tough on that, and I hope every other nation is too.

The President. What difference does it make? But they should have pushed it faster. They should have pushed it harder. And they didn't. They didn't. If they would have, it would have been a little bit better. In the meantime, I've built a lot of wall. I have a lot of money, and I've built a lot of wall. But it would've been nice to have gotten done. And I would like to see major immigration reform, and maybe that's something we can all work on, Bill, where we all get together and do major immigration reform—not just for a wall, for a barrier; for port of entry, for other things.

The President. I get my numbers from a lot of sources—like Homeland Security, primarily. And the numbers that I have from Homeland Security are a disaster. And you know what else is a disaster? The numbers that come out of Homeland Security, Kirstjen, for the cost that we spend and the money that we lose because of illegal immigration: Billions and billions of dollars a month. Billions and billions of dollars. And it's unnecessary.

When I ran for President, my first speech, I mentioned the word "rape." The press went after me; I couldn't believe it. I said, "Will it be like this always?" [Laughter] The answer was yes. It even got worse. From day one, I mention the word "rape." If you look at that speech, that was so innocent compared to what's really happening. That was a very innocent speech compared to the real facts. Illegal immigration is not compassionate. It's inhumane, unjust, and cruel. The media fights me on this, but I say it: Mothers who love their daughters, when their daughters are getting ready to make that 2,000-mile trek up through Mexico—and frankly, I wish Mexico would stop them at their northern border, at our—I wish Mexico would stop them. Because you know, they have a border. They call it their southern border. It's 2,000 miles down from our southern border. I wish Mexico would stop them.
Border Patrol recently reported apprehending 7,000 unlawful migrants in a single week on just one part of the Texas border, a couple of weeks ago. Our immigration system is stretched far beyond the breaking point. To confront this national security crisis, last month, I declared a national emergency. A national emergency. And when I see these people—and they're good people—some Senators, mostly—I tell you, the House has been fantastic.
Illegal immigration is also deeply unfair to American workers and taxpayers, including millions and millions of hard-working legal immigrants. If you care about helping immigrants and care about their success, if you care about reducing poverty and raising living standards, then you must support a safe, strong, and very, very secure border.
We need an immigration policy that helps all Americans thrive, flourish, prosper. We need an immigration policy that's going to be great for our corporations and our great companies. We need an immigration policy where people coming into our country can love our country and love our fellow citizens. And this includes shutting down sanctuary cities.
Not my fault I inherited this mess, but we're fixing it. We have to end chain migration, and we have to cancel the visa lottery. Every American, no matter where they're born, will benefit from the creation of a lawful immigration system. It is such—you talk about an emergency. Our immigration system is so broken, folks. It's so broken. It's so sad to see. It's incompetent. It's laughed at all over the world.
Sadly, on immigration and so many other issues, Democrat lawmakers have totally abandoned the American mainstream. But that's going to be good for us in 2020. They're embracing open borders, socialism, and extreme late-term abortion.
It's a colossal surge, and it's overwhelming our immigration system, and we can't let that happen. So, as I say, and this is our new statement: The system is full. Can't take you anymore. Whether it's asylum, whether it's anything you want, it's illegal immigration. We can't take you anymore. We can't take you. Our country is full. Our area is full. The sector is full. Can't take you anymore, I'm sorry. Can't happen. So turn around. That's the way it is.

Mr. Judd. On a serious note, I began my career right here in El Centro 21 years ago—in the El Centro Sector. I work with people like Butch Mauldin, Pat Whipple, Mario Campos, Mike Matzke. We worked prewall, postwall. We've seen what happens when walls are built. We've seen how illegal immigration is driven low when we build those physical barriers. People say that it's "archaic." People say that they don't work, but in reality—and what Chief Chavez just explained—those walls do, in fact, work.

We'll soon be taking further action to ensure that federal benefits are preserved for hardworking citizens who need them the most. We're also outlining historic pro-American Immigration Reform. It's working its way through, I must tell you, some of it's not gonna happen unless you vote for Republicans in the upcoming election, and I will tell you it's not very far away and you're gonna have great immigration laws.
The President. Well, we're going to get the immigration money later, according to everybody. I have to take care of my farmers with the disaster relief. If I didn't do that, we were—I mean, really, it's a long time in coming.
So the answer is: I totally support it. I'd like to see it happen. We'll take care of the immigration later. The wall is being built. We just left the Army Corps of Engineers. We have—we will soon have hundreds of miles under construction, and we'll have way over 400 miles completed by the end of next year.
President Trump. Well, I don't like to take positions in things that I'm not, you know, really—I understand the issue very well. I really predicted what was going to happen. Some of you remember that prediction. It was a strong prediction, made at a certain location, on a development we were opening the day before it happened. And I thought it was going to happen because of immigration more than anything else, but probably, it happens for a lot of reasons.

You just can't crash our borders like this. Mexico has very, very strong immigration laws. We have incompetent—we have the worst immigration laws, the dumbest laws anywhere in the world—anywhere in the world. There's nothing close. But Mexico's laws are as strong as they can be.

Now, with all of that being said, if the Democrats got together with me for 15 minutes, we could wipe out the loopholes and we wouldn't need anything from anybody. But right now Mexico is helping us much more on immigration than the Democrats in the U.S.

