Number one, I think we should stiffen the penalties for those individuals who commit a crime while in the possession of a handgun. This includes, for those type of crimes, mandatory criminal prison sentences.
In addition, in the budget for fiscal 1977, I recommended an additional 500 employees for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division [Bureau] of the Department of the Treasury, so that they can move into major metropolitan areas of high crime and incidents and really go after the trading of handguns in those areas where the danger is the greatest. I am categorically opposed to the registration of guns and/or the individuals who own handguns.
THE PRESIDENT. I have long been an adamant opponent of the registration of guns or the registration of gunowners, period. Let me add, if I might, one or two sentences to that. I believe that we should pass legislation to make mandatory certain penalties for those individuals who commit a crime in the possession of a gun, period. And I also happen to believe that we should, in those areas of heavy crime, where we know, from the records that the so-called "Saturday Night Specials," the cheap handguns, are used in great numbers to commit a crime, to commit murder, then we ought to beef up the law enforcement people in those areas to try and stop that kind of attack against our society.
First, I am sending later this week a message to the Congress calling for prompt action on a number of legislative programs that Congress must act on before adjournment. I am recommending affirmative action, as quickly as possible, on my further tax reduction proposals, on the remaining portions of my energy independence recommendations, on my stronger anticrime proposals, and, of course, general revenue sharing.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Maynard, the record of gun control, whether it's in one city or another or in some States does not show that the registration of a gun, handgun, or the registration of the gun owner has in any way whatsoever decreased the crime rate or the use of that gun in the committing of a crime. The record just doesn't prove that such legislation or action by a local city council is effective.
What we have to do--and this is the crux of the matter--is to make it very, very difficult for a person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime to stay out of jail. If we make the use of a gun in the commission of a crime a serious criminal offense and that person is prosecuted, then in my opinion we are going after the person who uses the gun for the wrong reason. I don't believe in the registration of handguns or the registration of the handgun owner. That has not proven to be effective. And, therefore, I think the better way is to go after the criminal, the individual who commits a crime in the possession of a gun and uses that gun for a part of his criminal activity.
Those are the people who ought to be in jail. And the only way to do it is to pass strong legislation so that once apprehended, indicted, convicted, they will be in jail and off the streets and not using guns in the commission of a crime.
MR. MAYNARD. But, Mr. President, don't you think that the proliferation of the availability of handguns contributes to the possibility of those crimes being committed? And there is a second part to my follow-up. Very quickly, there are, as you know and as you've said, jurisdictions around the country with strong gun control laws. The police officials in those cities contend that if there were a national law to prevent other jurisdictions from providing the weapons that then come into places like New York, that they might have a better handle on the problem. Have you considered that in your analysis of the handgun proliferation problem?
I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun. And the only purpose that I would see in registering handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the ownership of those guns by those who have used them in the commission of a crime or who have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun. I believe that limited approach to the question would be advisable, and I think adequate, but that's as far as I would go with it.
I believe, however, a comment ought to be made about the direction of the Burger Court vis-a-vis the Court that preceded it. It seems to me that the Miranda case was a case that really made it very, very difficult for the police, the law enforcement people in this country, to do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes were properly handled and sent to jail. The Miranda case, the Burger Court is gradually changing. And I am pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the Burger Court to modify the so-called Miranda decision.
On the higher plane of public morality, there is no need for me to preach tonight. We have thousands of far better preachers and millions of sacred scriptures to guide us on the path of personal right-living and exemplary official conduct. If we can make effective and earlier use of moral and ethical wisdom of the centuries in today's complex society, we will prevent more crime and more corruption than all the policemen and prosecutors governments can ever deter. If I might say so, this is a job that must begin at home, not in Washington.

Six weeks ago, I told the American people and the Congress that we all have a lot of work to do. We have a long national agenda, and I stress today that the control of crimes, especially violent crime, is one of the top items on that agenda.
I think it is fair to say that all Americans can agree on some conclusions about crime. There is far too much of it. It can no longer be ignored. It can no longer be rationalized away. The time has come for all of us to act.
The point in dispute is precisely how crime can be reduced. I have some proposals that I will spell out later to both the Nation and to the Congress.
We all know that earthy description which President Truman gave to the Oval Office some years ago: "The buck stops here." When it comes to fighting crimes, most of the buck stops at your offices. You are in the frontline; you are the top commanders in the war on crime.
But the total of $880 million, which is roughly the annual appropriation now at the Federal level, it is actually only 5 percent of the total spent on State and local crime justice systems. Actually, Federal money is essentially seed money.
Perhaps the most important activity of the Federal Government in this area is research and development. We have learned very valuable lessons about the nature of crime and its prevention.
For effective management, we first have to have some hard decisions on priorities. As a starter, I would suggest a high priority on violent crime and street crime in the inner city. There is where crime does the most damage to our whole urban structure. There is where crime most hurts the poor who already suffer enough.
One bright spot in the crime scene is the success of your efforts against urban crime. Your concentration on street crime seems to be paying off, and I compliment you and congratulate you. But as we move forward in this area with the success that you have, let's keep the effort moving stronger and stronger.
Another priority as I see it is the habitual offender--the so-called career criminal. Most crime, according to the statistics, is the work of a limited number of hardened criminals. We must take the criminal out of circulation. We must make crime hazardous and very costly. We must ensure that swift and prolonged imprisonment will inevitably follow each and every offense. Only then will we deter others from pursuing careers of crime.
In this area, you know better than I that all this cannot be done by the police in isolation. Effective anticrime management requires the close cooperation of police, prosecutors, courts, and corrections. Where they work together, you not only will obtain a better conviction rate but you will save unbelievable hours-police hours--that are now, unfortunately, wasted.
But to reduce the crime rate, we need the cooperation of one other party-namely, the public. Crime statistics, shocking as they are, often show us only the top of the iceberg. Too much crime goes unreported. A lot of witnesses never show up, especially after the fourth or fifth continuance.
Now, what can be done? First of all, we go back to good management. Fast action and better conviction rate of major crimes can help restore public confidence in the system. Better scheduling, better notification of witnesses, and fewer continuances will serve to cut down the terribly frustrating waste of the witness' time.
Of course, the police can't do everything to win the war on crime, although you have done a magnificent job under most difficult circumstances. The police, plus the prosecutors, plus the courts, plus the prisons, cannot do the whole job. The community and, particularly, the family can be of tremendous help.
Progress is slow, but it is my honest judgment that I think we are on the right track. We are beginning, as we move in the decade of the seventies, to learn how to fight modern crime more effectively. And as we move together, I think the results will be increasingly evident.
In the District of Columbia, for example, there has been a fortunate combination of good management methods, very ample resources, and outstanding leadership from Chief Jerry Wilson, who, unfortunately, is retiring this year. Reported crime in the District of Columbia shows a 40 percent drop during his tenure in office, spanning the last 5 years.
The pardon power entrusted to the President under the Constitution of the United States has a long history and rests on precedents going back centuries before our Constitution was drafted and adopted. The power has been used sometimes as Alexander Hamilton saw its purpose: "In seasons of insurrection... when a well-timed offer of pardon to the insurgents or rebels may restore the tranquillity of the commonwealth; and which, if suffered to pass unimproved, it may never be possible afterwards to recall."1 Other times it has been applied to one person as "an act of grace... which exempts the individual, on whom it is bestowed, from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed."2 When a pardon is granted, it also represents "the determination of the ultimate authority that the public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment fixed."3 However, the Constitution does not limit the pardon power to cases of convicted offenders or even indicted offenders.4 Thus, I am firm in my conviction that as President I did have the authority to proclaim a pardon for the former President when I did.
I think, from the mail I have received from all over the country, as well as my own district, I know that the people want to understand how you can explain having pardoned Richard Nixon without specifying any of the crimes for which he was pardoned. And how can you explain pardoning Richard Nixon without obtaining any acknowledgement of guilt from him? How do you explain the failure to consult the Attorney General of the United States with respect to the issuance of the pardon, even though in your confirmation hearings you had indicated the Attorney General's opinion would be critical in any decision to pardon the former President?
Frankly, I am concerned at some of the questioning by my colleagues, asking questions, if all men are not equal under the law, because certainly, being the outstanding lawyers that they are, they know that the pardoning power itself is inherently inequitable, but for a larger purpose, it grants to the Chief Executive of the Federal Government or the State, in the case of State crimes, to pardon individuals who may or have been indicted or convicted of crimes.
While not agreeing with all the provisions of the act, I strongly believe in its overall purpose. We must save as many of our young people as we can before they become trapped in a life of crime. And we owe every juvenile the full protection of his or her constitutional rights.
The more all of us do to prevent juvenile crime, the more we protect its potential victims--before, rather than after the damage has been done.
Confidence in America's institutions has been deteriorating since the early 1960's. There were, unfortunately, assassinations, upheavals in great cities and in school systems throughout our country, riots and terrorism, crime, drug abuse, pollution, the Vietnam war, the Watergate affair with the first Presidential resignation in America's history, the energy shortage, rising inflation, and other almost unbelievable blows to America's self-image
And it is because of this "grand junction" of interest in ideals that I am optimistic when it comes to America. There are plenty of big problems that are waiting to be solved--inflation, energy, pollution, crime--to name only a few. But there is not one of them that we as Americans can't lick if we pull together and act responsibly. There is, however, one thing our elected officials must remember. No government can expect the people to act responsibly when it fails to do so itself.
The FBI has the responsibility to check on individuals who are charged with a crime--any American citizen, including a Member of Congress. The FBI, if they are seeking to employ somebody or if somebody applies for a job, the FBI has an obligation to check on that person's record. And some Members of. Congress at the present time served in the FBI at various times prior to being elected to the House or to the Senate. So, the FBI ought to have files on those people.
THE PRESIDENT. I hadn't heard that, John, but I think that is kind of silly.
MR. CHANCELLOR. You mentioned the charter of the CIA and you mentioned the responsibility of the United States Government to engage in a certain amount of looking at and investigating citizens who are not necessarily charged with a crime, as in job applications and in other things. Do you suppose that we could work out a better way of sharing this responsibility in the American Government? Could that come out of these FBI and CIA investigations?
In my first speech as President to my former colleagues in the Congress, I had dedicated groups such as this one in mind when I said, and I quote: "On the higher plane of public morality there is no need for me to preach .... We have thousands of far better preachers and millions of sacred scriptures to guide us on the path of personal right living and exemplary official conduct. If we can make effective and earlier use of the moral and ethical wisdom of the centuries in today's complex society, we will prevent more crime and more corruption than all the policemen and prosecutors of the government can ever deter."
And my question is whether you think it would be fair for the Democrats to charge that this Administration is soft on crime, or at least is incapable of dealing with the problem.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, unfortunately for the country, the crime rate has been increasing for the last 10 or 15 years, whether it was under a Democratic administration, under President Kennedy or President Johnson or, except for, I think, 1 year under the former President, the crime rate has been going up.
I would like to talk with you tonight about law and the spirit of abiding by the law. I ask you to think along with me about the concern of so many Americans about the problem of crime. And let us start with the great Preamble of our Constitution which seeks to insure domestic tranquillity. Have we achieved on our streets and in our homes that sense of domestic tranquillity so essential to the pursuit of happiness?
Do we provide that domestic tranquillity which the Constitution seeks? If we take the crime rates as an indication, the answer has to be no.
The number of violent crimes rises steadily, and we have recently suffered the national disgrace of lawbreaking in high places. Violent crimes on our streets and in our homes make fear pervasive. They strike at the very roots of community life; they sever the bonds that link us as fellow citizens; they make citizens fear each other.
We have seen how lawbreaking by officials can be stopped by the proper functioning of our basic institutions--executive, legislative, and judicial branches. But America has been far from successful in dealing with the sort of crime that obsesses America day and night. I mean street crime, crime that invades our neighborhoods and our homes--murders, robberies, rapes, muggings, holdups, break-ins--the kind of brutal violence that makes us fearful of strangers and afraid to go out at night.
Since men and women are not angels, we must have the apparatus of law enforcement. Those who prey on others, especially by violence, are very, very few in number. A very small percentage of the whole population accounts for a very large proportion of the vicious crimes committed. For example, in one study of nearly 10,000 males born in 1945, it was found that only 6 percent of them accounted for two-thirds of all of the violent crimes committed by the entire group.
Most serious crimes are committed by repeaters. These relatively few, persistent criminals who cause so much misery and fear are really the core of the problem. The rest of the American people have a right to protection from their violence.
Most of the victims of violent crime are the poor, the old, the young, the disadvantaged minorities, the people who live in the most crowded parts of our cities, the most defenseless. These victims have a valid claim on the rest of society for the protection and the personal safety that they cannot provide for themselves--in short, for domestic tranquillity.
Hardly a day passes when some politician does not call for a massive crackdown on crime, but the problem is infinitely more complex than that. Such an approach has not proven effective in the long haul; it is not the American style. We need a precise and effective solution.
In the sixties, crime rates went higher and higher, but the number of persons in prisons, State and Federal, actually went down. A Rand Corporation report of one major jurisdiction showed that of all convicted robbers with a major, prior record, only 27 percent were sent to prison after conviction.
Notice, please, that I'm speaking only of convicted felons. I am not chastising our system for determining guilt or innocence. I am urging that virtually all of those convicted of a violent crime should be sent to prison. And this should be done especially if a gun was involved or there was other substantial danger or injury to a person or persons. There certainly should be imprisonment if the convicted person has a prior record of convictions.
Most serious offenders are repeaters. We owe it to their victims--past, present, and future--to get them off the streets. This is just everyday common sense, as I see it. The crime rate will go down if persons who habitually commit most of the predatory crimes are kept in prison for a reasonable period, if convicted, because they will then not be free to commit more crimes.
Convicts should be treated humanely in prison. Loss of liberty should be the chief punishment. Improvement in the treatment of and facilities for prisoners is long overdue. But it is essential that there be less delay in bringing arrested persons to trial, less plea bargaining, and more courtroom determination of guilt or innocence, and that all--or practically all-of those actually convicted of predatory crime be sent to prison.
What else can we do? The Federal Code can be modified to make more sentences mandatory and, therefore, punishment more certain for those convicted of violent crimes.
What can the White House do about this? The Federal role is limited, because most violent crimes are matters for State and local authorities. Further, the creation of criminal sanctions and their interpretation are the concerns of the legislative and judicial branches as well as the executive branch.
The principal role of the Federal Government in the area of crime control has centered in providing financial and technical assistance to the several States. However, while we are all aware that the actual control of crime in this country is a matter primarily of State responsibility under the Constitution, there are several areas in which it is the chief responsibility of the Federal Government.
We can encourage better use of existing prison facilities to minimize detention of persons convicted of minor crimes, thus making more room for the convicted felons to be imprisoned. There are a number of estimates of how much the crime rate would be reduced if all convicted criminals with major records were sent to prison instead of being set free after conviction, as too many are today.
Although we might expect the certainty of a prison sentence to serve as a deterrent, let us remember that one obvious effect of prison is to separate lawbreakers from the law-abiding society. In totalitarian states it's easier to assure law and order. Dictators eliminate freedom of movement, of speech, and of choice. They control the news media and the educational system. They conscript the entire society and deprive people of basic civil liberties. By such methods, crime can be strictly controlled. But in effect, the entire society becomes one huge prison. This is not a choice we are willing to consider.
Since these words were written, the world has changed profoundly. But the old question still remains: Can a free people restrain crime without sacrificing fundamental liberties and a heritage of compassion?
The Republican Party is submitting to the Congress today a very important crime proposal, with an emphasis on returning domestic tranquillity to our society in all 50 States. The crime message, which I am sending to the Congress today, will have a primary emphasis on the victims of crime and the potential victims of crime. We should be concerned about them, and in order to do that, we have to deal strongly with the people that commit crimes.
Two months ago, at Yale University Law School, I spoke about a subject that touches the lives of all Americans--crime. Today, I am sending to the Congress a special message spelling out in concrete terms the program for curbing crime and insuring domestic tranquillity, which I advocated in that speech.
First and foremost, our effort should be directed toward the protection of law-abiding citizens. For too long, the law has centered its attention more on the rights of the criminal than on the victim of crime. It is high time that we reverse this trend and put the highest priority on the victims and potential victims.
Even though the chief responsibility in combating crime lies with State and local officials, the Federal Government can provide leadership. It can improve the quality of existing Federal laws and the Federal judicial system. It can enact and vigorously enforce new laws governing criminal conduct at the Federal level, and it can provide financial and technical assistance to State and local governments in their efforts to stem lawlessness.
For example, I propose that the Congress enact mandatory prison sentences for Federal offenses committed with firearms or other dangerous weapons, and for hijackers, kidnapers, traffickers in hard drugs, and repeated Federal offenders who commit crimes of violence. I urge State and local authorities to take similar steps.
This is a matter of deep, personal concern to all Americans. So, I urge the Congress to reflect this concern for the victims of crime by acting on this message in a prompt, positive, and nonpartisan spirit.
And I am not going to take this particular opportunity to urge the people of Cleveland to reelect Mayor Ralph Perk, who in his first year as mayor reduced crime in this city by 26 percent and who has restored financial stability to this city's government.
But the problem is it will be disastrous for America. It will be disastrous in Ohio, in Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, Illinois, New Jersey, North Carolina. So, use your influence to get the right decision in the free society in which we live.Now, I happen to think we can declare America's independence from the fear and the alarming growth of crime. As I said earlier, Ralph Perk, as your good mayor, has done a fine job. And I happen to think, if the Congress would move, we can declare America's independence from foreign oil and energy sources.
Many of the problems, for example, of cities remain unsolved. And I should say with great emphasis, I am dedicated to turning around the trend of deterioration and despair, of crime and unemployment, of pollution and bad housing, and of drugs and premature death. But I am also dedicated to the conviction that local problems must, in the final analysis, be solved by local people. The Federal Government has helped and will continue to help.
Let me say this: In my crime message, which was submitted to the Congress several weeks ago, I strongly supported, as I think it is absolutely essential, legislation to expand the jurisdiction of Federal magistrates. You know better than I that the expansion of that responsibility can be very helpful in alleviating some of the caseload problems in the Federal judicial system.
In addition, in this crime message, I did propose action on the scope and the process of Federal jurisdiction, including the range of diversity, jurisdiction, the advisability of three-judge courts, possible avenues of Federal-State cooperation, and related proposals--all of which could be materially beneficial in reducing the caseload.
The independent voter wants the scales of justice to balance the right of the criminal defendant with the rights of a law-abiding society, and so do we. Our crime program is aimed at domestic tranquillity, with deep concern for the victim of crime. And the independent voter wants that as well.
I have decided, however, to discuss with you today another subject high on my agenda, one that affects every American and every Californian, one in which the role and the responsibility of State officials is even greater than that of the Federal Establishment; that is, the truly alarming increase in violent crime throughout this country.
I come to California not only to plead for this kind of Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime but to praise the progress you have already begun in California.
California has long been a leader in both law enforcement and criminal justice. The rate of increase in violent crimes here remains less than the national average. For the first quarter of this year, serious crime rose 18 percent for the Nation as a whole. It rose only 13 percent in California.
But both figures, I am sure we agree, are far, far too high. The rate for forcible rape was down, but murder was up 22 percent in California and robbery up 23 percent. What is more distressing, my good friend Evelle Younger 1 tells me that nearly 4 out of every 10 persons convicted of using firearms to kill someone or to rob someone were given probation. Approximately 2,300 persons convicted of violent crimes involving firearms are returned to the streets of California each year without serving a prison sentence.
Clearly, the billions of dollars spent at all levels of government since 1960 have not done the job of stemming the rise in crime. The reported crime rate has doubled, and unreported crimes have probably multiplied even more.
As a former lawmaker among active lawmakers, let me put before you three simple propositions about crime.
While it is true that not all men--nor all women--are angels, it is also true that the vast majority of Americans are law-abiding. In one study of 10,000 males born in 1945, it was shown that only 6 percent of them perpetrated two-thirds of all crimes committed by the entire sample.
As for serious crimes, most are committed by repeaters. Another study in a major metropolitan area showed that within a single year, more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were the work of only 10 individual criminals.
I am not suggesting that due process should be ignored or the legal rights of defendants be reduced. I am not urging a vindictive attitude toward convicted offenders. I am saying that, as a matter of public policy, the time has come to give equal weight on the scale of justice to the rights of the innocent victims of crimes of terror and violence.
Victims are my primary concern, and I am sure that is your primary concern. They should be the concern of all of us who have a role in making or executing or enforcing or interpreting the criminal law--Federal, State, or local. The vast majority of victims of violent crime in this country are the poor, the old, the very young, the disadvantaged minorities, the people who crowd our urban centers, the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
My third proposition is this: If most serious crimes are committed by repeaters, most violent crimes by criminals carrying guns, if the tiny minority of habitual lawbreakers can be identified by modern datakeeping methods, then is it not mandatory that such offenders, duly tried and convicted, be removed from society for a definite period of time rather than returning to the streets to continue to prey on the innocent and the law-abiding majority?
Although only a very limited number of violent crimes fall under Federal jurisdiction, I have urged the Congress to set an example by providing for mandatory prison terms for convicted offenders in such extraordinarily serious crimes as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and trafficking in hard drugs. I also advocate mandatory sentences for persons found guilty of crimes involving use of dangerous weapons and for repeat offenders, with or without a weapon, whose crimes show a potential or actual cause of physical injury. There will, of course, be sensible exceptions, but they must be minimal.
I hope all 50 States will follow suit. Far too many violent and repetitive criminals never spend a day in prison after conviction. Mandatory sentences need not be severe. It is the certainty of confinement that is presently lacking. We will never deter crime nor reduce its growth if potential lawbreakers feel they have favorable odds of escaping punishment. The more experienced in crime they get, the better their odds of not suffering the consequences. That is wrong, and it must be reversed, and the quicker, the better.
The temptation to politicians--and I trust we are all politicians here and proud of it--I am--is to call for a massive crackdown on crime and to advocate throwing every convicted felon in jail and throwing the key away.
We have heard such cries for years, and crime continues to gain on us. The problem is infinitely more complex than any updated vigilante mentality can cope with. We have to confess, you and I, that we do not know all of the answers. But as with other stubborn national problems, my philosophy is that we must take one sure step at a time. It is simply intolerable to stand still or slip backwards. It is simply impossible to devise a swift cure-all or a quick fix.
In a talk to my alma mater and to yours, Mr. Governor, the Yale Law School, last April, and again in a detailed message .to the Congress in June, I outlined the first steps which I believe must be taken to get a handle on the rising crime rates. I will not rehash these points today, except to thank the California Legislature for moving somewhat faster than Congress has on some of my recommendations, such as mandatory prison sentences for crimes involving firearms and hard drug pushing.
I told the Congress, not as a cop-out, but as a constitutional fact of life, that the Federal effort in the fight against crime really depends on the massive support from the States, which quite properly have sole jurisdiction in the exercise of most police powers.
As for LEAA, I must say candidly that it hasn't done as much to help curb the rising crime statistics as we had hoped. But it has encouraged experimentation and pilot projects in law enforcement and criminal justice which, if they work, can be adopted by other States. Some of the outstanding ones have been funded for California's own department of justice dealing with organized crime and criminal intelligence and to Sacramento and San Diego Counties for programs on juvenile delinquency, white-collar crime, fraud, drugs, and career criminals.
The drug problem in America could make several speeches by itself. Here again we have a very small number of deliberate criminals who destroy the domestic tranquillity of millions and millions of decent citizens. What is particularly outrageous is the tragedy they bring to young people who should be learning to face life, not run from it.
Loss of liberty is both a deterrent to crime and a prevention of repeated crime, at least while the offender is behind bars. Prisoners should be treated humanely, and we cannot expect judges, Mr. Chief Justice,2 and juries to convict and sentence the guilty to places of confinement that are cruel and degrading.
But I consider it essential that we reduce delay in bringing arrested persons to trial, sharply limit the prevailing practice of plea bargaining caused by congested prosecutor and court calendars, and significantly increase the proportion of those convicted of violent crimes and repeated crimes who actually serve time in prison.
I commend the State of California for its ongoing efforts in these areas as well as for your program, or programs to prevent juvenile crime and to rehabilitate youthful first-time offenders.
One of the worst aspects of the current rise in crime rates has been that almost half of all arrests are persons under 18 years of age. While imprisonment is clearly the way to put hardened criminals out of business for a period of time, it is obviously not the best way to deal with the very young. Yet, simply sending them home has not proved a very satisfactory solution, either.
Another aspect of the crime program that I have submitted--I asked the Congress to write into the revised Federal Criminal Code the stronger provisions to allow Federal action against organized crime wherever it rears its ugly head. The leaders of organized crime do not recognize State or, for that matter, national boundaries. It will take all of our law enforcement resources to fight this giant conspiracy against domestic tranquillity and prevent its spread.
Like other vexing problems facing California and the Nation, we will not conquer crime with a single roll call or a stroke of the Governor's or President's pen. But we must do what we can, and we must work together here and now for the sake of our children and our grandchildren.
It was really for this reason that I wanted to discuss crime today and the common front that we must create against it. Peace in our neighborhoods and places of business is almost as important as peace in the world.
Nowhere is the community of interest and the necessity of close collaboration between the Federal Government and the States of the Union more obvious than in the field of crime control. There is no more universal longing among our people than to be free of fear and safe in their homes and in their livelihoods.
I have not brought along any patent medicine that cures all human ills to peddle here in California. I have come simply to pledge to you my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime in cooperation and consultation with you and with all who have America at heart.
In moving against crime, with compassion for the victims and evenhanded justice for the violator, California can be the pacesetter for the Nation, as you have been in so many other challenges.
We have a lot of problems that have to be solved in this country. Louis Wyman understands some of those problems better than anybody that I know in Washington, as his record of attorney general speaks for itself. We have too much crime in America. Louis Wyman knows, as attorney general and as a Member of the Congress, how to effectively meet the challenge of crime in America.
Society has undergone vast changes in the past generation, and new ideas are constantly influencing our lives. New materialism, the pressures of modern life, new attitudes, social values, crime in our inner cities--all of these greatly affect the everyday life of the family. All of us have the responsibility to stand and support the standards we believe in. As religious people, stand up for your faith. I stand with you. We believe in the same God.
Fighting crime without the full commitment of the American people to a return to the moral values which made our Nation great is an expensive and completely hopeless enterprise. As Mr. Seidman 2 told us at lunch--and I think I quote him properly--he is looking for new directions to go back to old truths.
I believe that all of the money we have spent--and we have spent a great deal of money at the Federal level, about $800 million a year in the last 3 or 4 years--for what we call Law Enforcement Assistance Act programs, Federal money to States and local units of government, and unfortunately despite that vast expenditure of money, the crime rate continues to go up.
You talked just briefly about this in relation to the crime situation, but I wonder if you could give us a little more elaboration on how you think we can better focus in on this problem through the Bicentennial to get a better grip on moving forward with America.
THE PRESIDENT. I did recommend to the Congress early this year a rather comprehensive approach to crime control, a new proposal that would make it much more difficult for individuals to get what we call Saturday night specials, which are the cheap handguns that are used extensively for illegal purposes.
In addition, I proposed to the Congress that we have much more severe penalties for a person using a gun in the commission of some other crime and for mandatory sentences in order to get people who use guns in the process of committing a crime or alleged crime.
Last September, as was mentioned by Mr. Velde, I directed the Department of Justice to develop a program to deal with the career criminals throughout the country. Its goals, as all of you know, are quick identification of those who repeatedly commit serious crimes, priority of prosecution of those cases, and the assurance of appropriate sentences upon conviction so that they could not return immediately to victimize the community.
And speaking of victimizing the community, it of course means the victimizing of the individual. And in a speech that I gave at the Yale Law School this past spring,1 where I sought to lay out some guidelines and some further direction, we used two phrases that, in my opinion, ought to be the direction in which we go--concern for the victim of crime and concern for the domestic tranquillity of our country.
All of you, through your various responsibilities, know far better than myself the toll that crime exacts from our fellow citizens--a toll measured in blood, treasure, and peace of mind.
Unfortunately, the statistics prove that crime is on the rise. Since 1960--and this is hard to believe--reported crime has more than doubled. Last year we saw the annual crime rate increase by 17 percent--the largest yearly increase since the FBI began statistics in their department some 44 years ago.
This crime epidemic threatens the very foundation of our society, for it is law which makes human society possible. Each of us has taken an oath to uphold and to defend the Constitution which charges us with the duty, the very solemn obligation, of ensuring domestic tranquillity.
As you know, again far better than myself, a very large percentage of serious crimes are committed by a very small number of offenders. The career criminal program aims directly at solving this specific problem. And the success of this program will pave the way for a far greater effort, a far sharper focus on career criminals by our criminal justice system.
I happen to believe that is the way it should be. With few exceptions, the prosecution of serious crimes in this country is solely within the jurisdiction of State and local authorities.
J. Edgar Hoover earned such praise and such admiration from eight Presidents because, under his direction, the FBI became the superior professional organization it is today--and will continue to be under the able leadership of Clarence Kelley--with the very best scientific crime detection facilities to serve the Federal Government and the American people.
THE PRESIDENT. I set that forth in a crime message to the Congress where I said, "Our concern today ought to be for the victims of crime." The crime message that I sent to the Congress calls for mandatory sentences for those that participate in a crime of violence using a gun, and we have urged the courts to increase their confinement of convicted criminals.
Too many criminals today, after they have been convicted, are put off on probation. There ought to be a penalty for the committing of a crime, and that means confinement. Whether it is 6 months or some other term, I believe mandatory sentences are required in certain crimes.
I believe the courts have to be firmer, and I think they--you know, it is unbelievable, but a very, very high percentage of crime today is done by a very limited number of people, professional criminals, and they ought to be behind the bars.
Now, I have also recommended to the Congress some legislation that would provide mandatory prison sentences for people who use guns in the carrying out of violent crime. I wish the Congress would pass that legislation. I wish State legislatures would do the same in those cases where they don't have such legislation. We have to prosecute, convict, and put in jail those people who illegally use guns. And if we do, I think we can have a substantial impact on the bad use of firearms.
THE PRESIDENT. Helen, as soon as I am convinced that the gun itself is the culprit. In actuality, it is the person who uses the gun that causes the trouble. What we have to do is to make certain that the people who use the gun are punished. And if you will recall from the crime message that I submitted to the Congress several months ago,1 we provided for stricter legislation so that a person using a gun in an attempt or in the actual committing of a crime, that person had a mandatory sentence and went to jail. This is the way, in my opinion, to prevent the illegal use of guns and not penalize the people who are collectors or individuals who properly use guns.
The balance on crime has shifted so heavily on concern for the rights of the criminals that the rights of their victims are almost forgotten. I say this with emphasis. This must stop.
THE PRESIDENT. No question in my mind. I have a vision of what I want America to be. I think it is a good vision for 215 million Americans--I have said it in one way or another in response to other questions here. At peace with ourselves, peace throughout the world, better economic conditions, the strengthening of individual freedom in this country, the protection of our environment, as we try to move forward as a nation economically, control of the very difficult problem of crime--these are the things that I want done I happen to believe that they are good for America. I strongly feel that I am qualified to implement and to achieve those goals, that vision.
My recommendations on how to control violent crime were submitted to the Congress last June with strong emphasis on protecting the innocent victims of crime. To keep a convicted criminal from committing more crimes, we must put him in prison so he cannot harm more law-abiding citizens. To be effective, this punishment must be swift and it must be certain.
To speed Federal justice, I propose an increase this year in the United States attorneys prosecuting Federal crimes and the reinforcement of the number of United States marshals. Additional Federal judges are needed, as recommended by me and the Judicial Conference.
Another major threat to every American's person and property is the criminal carrying a handgun. The way to cut down on the criminal use of guns is not to take guns away from the law-abiding citizen, but to impose mandatory sentences for crimes in which a gun is used, make it harder to obtain cheap guns for criminal purposes, and concentrate gun control enforcement in highcrime areas.
My budget recommends 500 additional Federal agents in the 11 largest metropolitan high-crime areas to help local authorities stop criminals from selling and using handguns.
I recommended months ago that the Congress enact mandatory fixed sentences for persons convicted of Federal crimes involving the sale of hard drugs. Hard drugs, we all know, degrade the spirit as they destroy the body of their users.
It is unrealistic and misleading to hold out the hope that the Federal Government can move into every neighborhood and clean up crime. Under the Constitution, the greatest responsibility for curbing crime lies with State and local authorities. They are the frontline fighters in the war against crime.
As President, I pledge the strict enforcement of Federal laws and--by example, support, and leadership--to help State and local authorities enforce their laws. Together, we must protect the victims of crime and ensure domestic tranquility.
If the Bicentennial is to be more than a colorful, historical pageant, we must restore on local and State level the opportunity for individuals to have more say in how their taxes are spent, in how they live, in how they work, in how they fight crime, in how they go to school.
The American people in 1976 are not concerned with the polished image of candidates, but rather with the hard issues facing this country. They are concerned about jobs. They are concerned about the cost of health. They are concerned about housing, education, crime, and they are concerned about the cost of government and the price of groceries.
If this year's Bicentennial is to be more than a historic pageantry, we must restore to the people more power to decide how their taxes are spent, how they live, how they work, how they fight crime, and how their children go to school. Should the Bicentennial achieve nothing else, this alone would be a triumph for our heritage.
Number one, I think we should stiffen the penalties for those individuals who commit a crime while in the possession of a handgun. This includes, for those type of crimes, mandatory criminal prison sentences.
In addition, in the budget for fiscal 1977, I recommended an additional 500 employees for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division [Bureau] of the Department of the Treasury, so that they can move into major metropolitan areas of high crime and incidents and really go after the trading of handguns in those areas where the danger is the greatest. I am categorically opposed to the registration of guns and/or the individuals who own handguns.
This money has gone directly, with a minimum of redtape, to your State government, to your county and city governments. That money has helped to hold down local and State taxes. It has helped to fight crime. It has helped to educate children.
We realize today that passivity and permissiveness invite crime and that the certainty of punishment prevents crime, and I mean positive, swift, and just punishment. But the criminal justice system need not be vindictive to be effective.
A legal system that is exploited by the criminal but ignores his victim is sadly out of balance. I ask your help and that of all Americans in restoring that balance. I applaud the Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime that is emerging in Florida. The 10,000 volunteers now active in the citizen's crime watch of the Dade County Public Safety Department deserve particular commendation, and I am glad with the many others who have passed that on to those public-spirited citizens.
As you know, these crimewatchers have provided information leading to significant arrests, including the seizure, as I understand it, of some 23 tons of illegal drugs.
The responsibility of local officials in dealing with the alarming increase in violent crime is primarily under our Constitution. Yet crime is so pervasive that it can be brought under control only by the concerted efforts of all levels of government--Federal, State, and local, by the closest possible cooperation among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and by nonpartisan political unity against a common enemy.
We recall in this Bicentennial Year that our Founding Fathers adhered to the dictum of John Locke: Where there is no law, there is no freedom. The overwhelming majority of Americans are law-abiding citizens. It is a small, hard core of lawbreakers who commit a very large proportion of all crimes.
A recent study in one major metropolitan area recently showed that within one single year more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were committed by only 10 individuals. Most serious crimes are committed by repeaters. Such criminals duly tried and convicted must be removed from our society for a definite period of time. The law-abiding majority also has its rights and, as Chief Executive, I intend to see that those rights are given full weight on the scales of justice in America.
With very few exceptions, I strongly advocate mandatory minimum sentences for individuals who commit Federal crimes or offenses involving the use of a dangerous weapon or who commit such grave offenses as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and dealing in hard drugs, and for repeat offenders who commit Federal crimes that harm or endanger others. Too many violent and habitual criminals are convicted but never spend a single day in prison. The lack of certainty tempts the mugger and, yes, even the murderer. We must shorten their odds if we are to deter lawbreakers.
The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is not to disarm law-abiding citizens. The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is to impose mandatory sentences for gun crimes, to make it harder to obtain "Saturday night specials," and to concentrate our gun control in high crime areas.
The vast, vast majority of victims of violent crime in Florida and throughout the United States are the poor, the old, the children--the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
While prisons exist to protect society from the criminal, those convicted are on the main line back to crime if they are freed because of inadequate detention facilities. This is also true if inmates are confined in notoriously bad or overcrowded facilities that breed even more crime.
Unbelievably, America still has the same prison capacity as in 1960, although crime has doubled and our population has burgeoned. The need for more prisons is obvious and very, very urgent, and I included it in the budget for the next fiscal year four new Federal prisons that are badly needed to meet this problem at the Federal level.
Why are so many serious and violent crimes never reported to the police? The criminal victimization survey conducted by the Bureau of Census for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, better known as LEAA, disclosed that in 13 major cities, including Miami, only about one-third of rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults, and burglaries are reported to the police. Miami has a higher rate of reporting. than most of the cities that were surveyed.
But even here the figures show that 4 out of 10 rape cases are not reported. In the case of robbery accompanied by serious assault resulting in injury, 3 out of every 10 victims do not report the crime to police.
Crime figures, unfortunately, do not tell the full and the very terrible story. The fact that so many victims are reluctant to report serious crimes indicates a breakdown in the traditional relationship between the citizen and the police.
We must protect the victims of crime as well as the witnesses to crime. We must help them and we must treat them with great respect. That is essential.
This has been advanced by the National District Attorneys Association and a victim's rights card is now used in 18 States. The investigating officer informs the victim, "You have the right, as a victim of crime, the following: 'To be free from intimidation; to be told about available compensation for court appearances; to be told about available compensation for your injuries; to be told about social service agencies which can help you; and to be assisted by your criminal justice agencies.'"
The violent crime that plagues Americans is essentially within the realm of State and local government. But the Federal Government will assert its maximum role under the Constitution to fight crime within its jurisdiction.
The increasing abuse of hard drugs contributes to the soaring crime rate. In this case, our Federal responsibility is very, very clear. I have directed all Federal law enforcement agencies--in particular, the Drug Enforcement Administration-to intensify the drive against major narcotic traffickers. I am seeking legislation and cooperation with the Congress for mandatory prison sentences for convicted traffickers in hard drugs. These merchants of death deserve nothing less.
I have also recommended to the Congress to increase Federal funds to get drug addicts into treatment and out of crime. Your own program right here in Miami, known as the Treatment Alternative to Street Crime, funded by LEAA, I think is an excellent example of this concept at work.
The programs that I have outlined here tonight are part of a Federal effort to combat crime. As long as crime is a national or nationwide problem, the administration is determined to provide leadership and assistance in fighting it within our jurisdiction.
The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration is vital in this comprehensive national effort. Since 1969, the LEAA has given more than $153 million in Federal funds to the State of Florida to fight crime. I have asked that Congress extend the existing law. I repeat those requests today and call upon Congress to act rapidly so there is no indecision as to our total effort by the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branch to move forward.
I continue to urge the Congress to enact legislation to compensate victims of Federal crimes who suffer personal injuries. This is somewhat controversial, but I have been convinced, after looking at all of the evidence, that it is a step forward. And I hope that the Congress will respond. The money would come from a fund consisting of fines paid by convicted Federal offenders, promoting the concept of restitution under criminal law.
And I would appreciate the chance to meet with so many of you, as I have tonight, who follow the profession of the law, who know the problems, and who know from a practical experience what can and what ought to be done in the process of defeating crime.
Our concern should be for the victim of crime. Our concern should be for domestic tranquillity. Yes, we understand the problems of the law violator, but here in Florida you can take the lead, as you have in many cases, to be on the side of the victim and for domestic tranquillity. I hope and trust that we, on a national level, can take the same strong stand, which is essential for the benefit of all law-abiding citizens in our country.
And, as I close, I pledge to you and to all the people of Florida my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime here as well as elsewhere in full cooperation, in consultation with experts such as you, as we try to meet head on this very serious problem.
Thank you. Good night.
Third, tomorrow, I will send to the Congress special legislation to safeguard critical intelligence secrets. This legislation would make it a crime for a Government employee who has access to certain highly classified information to reveal that information improperly.
In Marion, they have helped build sewers and water lines; in Williamson County they have played a very crucial role in keeping you and your family safe from crime. That's the kind of responsive Federal program we need more of, not less.
THE PRESIDENT. I do not believe in the decriminalization of marijuana, period. There are many studies that are going on, but I have seen insufficient evidence to change the existing laws which make the sale or use or possession of marijuana a crime.
The way to handle that problem is to make sure that the penalty is strict and that the courts send the people who use a gun unlawfully in the commission of a crime--goes to jail and stays there.
When I became President 19 months ago, I think most of us would recognize that the country was in somewhat serious trouble. The credibility of government was low; inflation had reached frightening heights; too many people were out of work, and many more were to lose their jobs in the near future; there was no effective energy program; Federal spending was escalating beyond comprehension; the crime rate, tragically, was rising. As I sampled the mail that came into the office and as I traveled around the country, I had the distinct feeling that many, many Americans were understandably fearful of the future.
THE PRESIDENT. I have long been an adamant opponent of the registration of guns or the registration of gunowners, period. Let me add, if I might, one or two sentences to that. I believe that we should pass legislation to make mandatory certain penalties for those individuals who commit a crime in the possession of a gun, period. And I also happen to believe that we should, in those areas of heavy crime, where we know, from the records that the so-called "Saturday Night Specials," the cheap handguns, are used in great numbers to commit a crime, to commit murder, then we ought to beef up the law enforcement people in those areas to try and stop that kind of attack against our society.
We are all disturbed about the crime problem. I think there has been an overemphasis in the last 10 or 15 years on not being too harsh on the criminal. I believe that we have got to put the emphasis on the rights of the victim. We have got to look after the victims of crime and prevent crime from being undertaken.
There was good reason to be pleased because, it seemed we had not only turned the corner in drug abuse but we had also begun to make significant strides in street crime problems. Our success, however, did not last as long as most of us would have hoped. The base of the heroin trade has now shifted to other countries, and today there is a renewed and alarming flow of drug traffic into this country.
Significantly, the greatest bulk of this $17 billion is money lost through crime. Law enforcement officials estimate that up to one-half of robberies, muggings, burglaries, and other forms of property crimes are committed by addicts to support their expensive and debilitating habits.
REPORTER. The continued influx of illegal aliens at a time of high unemployment remains our basic concern in this part of the country. The issue has been debated for years and is still bottled up in committees, and the so-called Rodino bill would make it a crime to employ illegal aliens. What is your position on that measure, and what message do you have in general for Congress on that position?
THE PRESIDENT. Last year, I submitted to the Congress a comprehensive anticrime bill which included a number of provisions aimed at controlling the illegal use of guns, and let me cite you what they were:
Number one, I proposed to the Congress that we make it a mandatory certain penalty for anybody who commits a crime while in the possession of a firearm. In addition, I suggested to the Congress that we tighten up the control of these cheap handguns called Saturday Night Specials. A few years ago the Congress passed legislation to prohibit the importation of Saturday Night Specials from overseas. But the people who make them overseas, what they did to evade the law was to send the parts to the United States, and they have been assembled in our country.
Since revenue sharing began in 1972, the city of Evansville has received almost $10 million in general revenue sharing funds. That money right here locally helped to pay for public services, it helped to improve your city by repaving half of the streets, by upgrading your fire department equipment. Right now those revenue sharing funds are being used to protect you and your families from crime.
THE PRESIDENT. First, let me put this administration clearly on record that the Department of Justice of this administration will strongly implement any legislation that calls for criminal action against those people who commit a violent crime. There's no question about that. We have done it and will continue to do it.
We must continue working to identify and to solve those social and institutional problems which cause crime in the first place. But there are also new efforts we can make and have been making to fight crime by improving the administration of justice. We must ensure that the law is administered fairly, swiftly, and surely.
One of my earliest concerns as President was to seek some cures for our crime problem, a problem which has been growing in this country for more than 50 years. I put crime control among the top items of our national agenda. In 1975 we saw the rate of increase in crime drop substantially in America--from 17 percent in 1974 to 9 percent in 1975--and we have found some productive ways to deal with crime by providing ideas and Federal seed money to the State and local authorities who have the responsibility for criminal prosecution.
For example, LEAA last year finished a report on rape and its victims, and is currently sponsoring a major national survey on that subject. We must continue our efforts at the Federal level to help local authorities improve their administration of justice. That is why I have recommended that funding for the Law Enforcement Assistance Act be extended through 1981, so that programs such as this can continue and so that we can confront special crime problems.
Still another program with very special promise was instituted at my direction shortly after I took office. In September of 1974 I directed the Department of Justice to undertake in connection with State and local government a career criminal impact program. The career criminal program is founded on a very basic truth--most Americans are law abiding and the vast majority of serious crimes in this country are committed by a very small minority of habitual offenders.
Let me make very clear that we do not pursue this swift justice in these very heavy sentences out of vindictiveness. I believe, in general, we must do everything we can to rehabilitate those who have committed crimes and to help them regain their place in society. But, for these career criminals, rehabilitation has obviously failed. These individuals have all been to one or more correctional institutions, and they have demonstrated for them at least rehabilitation programs have served no useful purpose.
Through programs such as this, we can help relieve the American people of a terrible threat to their lives and to their safety. By combating crime we reaffirm the right of every American to enjoy life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
We must not be content until the potential criminal faces arrest so certain, punishment so heavy, that he will lose his taste for acts of crime and acts of violence.
Let me summarize the actions that we have taken to reduce crime in America. In addition to instituting the career criminal program and recommending the extension of funds for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, my budget that is for fiscal 1977 provides funds for four new Federal prisons. I have directed the Department of Justice to develop new programs to protect and to assist the witnesses in Federal criminal proceedings while fully supporting the right of the law-abiding citizens to own firearms.
I have recommended legislation which would make mandatory sentences for those who use a gun in the commission of a Federal crime. I have intensified the fight against hard drugs, which we all know are directly connected in many cases with crimes.
I have recommended that the Congress increase funds to get drug addicts into the treatment and out of crime. We are spending 10 times more Federal funds on drug prevention treatment and rehabilitation this year than we spent just 7 years ago.
In addition to mandatory minimum sentences for drug traffickers and for Federal crimes involving the use of dangerous weapons, I have recommended to the Congress mandatory, minimum sentences for repeat offenders who commit violent crimes and criminals guilty of grave offenses, such as aircraft hijacking and kidnaping.
All of our efforts in these many, many areas have been aimed at ensuring domestic tranquillity and the rule of law. But, let us remember that crime is just one threat to the peace and to the security of all Americans.
THE PRESIDENT. The question is, what has this administration done in crime control in the United States?
First, in 1975, I would say July, as I recall, I submitted a comprehensive crime control bill to the Congress of the United States. And let me just give you one of the particular provisions that I recommended, which I followed up last week in the drug abuse control message that I sent to the Congress.
Another proposal that I recommended a year ago in the crime control message was that anybody carrying a gun who was convicted of committing a felony must also go to jail for a mandatory period of time, period.
May I say parenthetically, while we are on the subject of guns, I am unalterably opposed to the registration of gunowners and the registration of guns, period. We must make certain that the person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime goes to jail and the individuals who collect or legally use guns are not inhibited by a bureaucracy from the Federal Government.
There were a number of other provisions in the crime message that I submitted a year ago. Congress hasn't acted on this legislation. I hope they will before they adjourn this year.
But I am able to report to you that because we, I think, have created the right environment, because we have done some good things with what we call career criminal programs such as in Houston and in Dallas and elsewhere throughout the country, we have reduced the rate of crime in the country from 17 percent in 1974 to 9 percent in 1975. But we are going to do better and better with the kind of enforcement, the kind of legislation that I have recommended.
But material progress in the United States will be of little comfort to us if millions of Americans are forced to live in a climate of fear. I favor bringing the criminals who cause that fear to swift and certain justice. Making it easy on criminals invites crime, and the certainty of punishment helps to stop it. I have no patience with those who picture the violent criminal as a helpless victim of society's neglect.
Many violent criminals are not victims of society but the enemies of society, and they should be dealt with as the public enemies that they are. Most crimes in this country are committed by a small hard-core of lawbreakers, many of whom are chronic offenders. Too often these violent and habitual criminals are returned to the streets without spending a day in jail, even after they are convicted of a serious crime.
This is not justice to the victims of crime or to society as a whole. And I intend to see to it, as far as the Federal Government is concerned, that justice is done in the United States of America.
I strongly advocate mandatory, minimum sentences for criminals who repeatedly commit Federal crimes that harm or endanger others. Last week I sent to the Congress legislation to require the imposition of mandatory, minimum sentences for those convicted of trafficking in heroin and other similar narcotic drugs. Sentences under this legislation would be at least for 3 years for the first offense and for at least 6 years for subsequent offenses or for selling hard drugs to minors. Parole would not be permitted.
I have recommended that the Congress reduce the criminal use of handguns by imposing mandatory sentences for crimes involving the use of a handgun or other dangerous weapons. Disarming law-abiding citizens is not the way to do it.
I think the success of our law enforcement efforts can be seen in the fact that the rate of increase in crime nationwide has been cut in half during this administration. It's still too high, but it went from 17 percent in 1974 to 9 percent in 1975.
What we are trying to do will reduce it in the future even further, and we are going to work at it. Of course, we must pursue the constitutional goal of ensuring domestic tranquility with due regard for the constitutional rights of those accused. But the time has come to put more emphasis on the protection and safeguarding of the rights of the innocent victims of crime; and that is the watchword of this administration.
We have not yet overcome many of our most persistent problems. No one should pretend that we have. We are still far below our potential as a people. Unemployment, poverty, crime, and prejudice are too far widespread, but we have moved beyond a time that could be characterized as the greening of America. What we see today is the healing of America.
It's also a great privilege and honor for me to address this convention of the Peace Officers of California. Your daily struggle to keep the peace and combat crime in this State has won the well-deserved praise of the people of California.
Consider the very real concern of so many Americans about the problems of crime. Let us start with the great Preamble of our Constitution, which seeks to "insure domestic Tranquility..." Law makes human society possible. It pledges safety to every member so that the company of fellow human beings can be a blessing instead of a threat.
Do we provide that domestic tranquility which the Constitution seeks? If we take the crime rates as an indication, the answer has to be "No." Violent crimes on our streets and in our homes make fear pervasive. They strike at the roots of our community life. They make citizens fear one another.
The harsh fact is that passivity and permissiveness invite crime and that the certainty of punishment prevents crime--I mean positive, swift, and just punishment.
The great majority of crimes constitute violations of State laws and, therefore, under our Constitution, the responsibility for dealing with them rests primarily on local officials. The Federal Government, however, can serve as a model by firmly and justly enforcing its own laws and by improving the quality of the Federal criminal justice system.
We recall in this Bicentennial Year, that our Founding Fathers adhered to the dictum of John Locke: "Where there is no law, there is no freedom." The overwhelming majority of Americans are law-abiding citizens. It is a hard core of law-breakers who commit a very large proportion of all crime.
A great many serious crimes are committed by repeaters. You know that probably better than I. Such criminals--duly tried and convicted--must be removed from our society for a very definite and specific time. A law-abiding majority in America has its rights, and those rights should be given full weight on the scales of justice in America.
With very few exceptions, I strongly advocate mandatory minimum sentences for individuals who commit crimes or offenses involving the use of a dangerous weapon or who commit such grave offenses as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and dealing in hard drugs, and for repeated offenders who commit Federal crimes that harm or endanger others.
The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is not to disarm law-abiding citizens. I am totally opposed to the registration of guns or gunowners. The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is to impose mandatory sentences for gun crimes, to prohibit the manufacture and sale of Saturday night specials, and to concentrate our resources for enforcement in high crime areas.
Another important cause of the violent crime that plagues Americans and makes a major contributor to the soaring crime rate is drug abuse. The time has come to step up our fight, sharpen the weapons in our arsenal, and launch a new and a far more aggressive attack against this insidious enemy. The cost of drug abuse to this Nation is absolutely staggering.
Significantly, the greatest bulk of this $17 billion is money lost through crime. Law enforcement officials estimate that up to one-half of the robberies, muggings, burglaries, and other forms of property crimes are committed by addicts to support their expensive and debilitating habit. It's a real tragedy. And I pledge to you today that I will spare no effort to crush the menace of drug abuse.
Above all, we must always remember that law enforcement alone cannot win the war on crime. The combined efforts of the Federal Government, State and local authorities will be of little use unless the American people rally to fight the scourge of crime within their own communities.
I am particularly encouraged by the citizens coalitions against crime that are cropping up all over the United States. Here, as in other law enforcement areas, California is in the forefront. The 50,000 volunteers in the neighborhood watch program in the city of Los Angeles have been able to cut crime substantially. In Vallejo, not a single member of the city's home alert program had their homes burglarized during all of 1975.
1 Reporter for the Arizona Republic, who was killed on June 2 allegedly because of his investigations into organized crime.
As we begin our third century, there is still so much to be done. We must increase the independence of the individual and the opportunity of all Americans to attain their full potential. We must ensure each citizen's right to privacy. We must create a more beautiful America, making human works conform to the harmony of nature. We must develop a safer society, so ordered that happiness may be pursued without fear of crime or manmade hazards. We must build a more stable international order, politically, economically, and legally. We must match the great breakthroughs of the past century by improving health and conquering disease. We must continue to unlock the secrets of the universe beyond our planet as well as within ourselves. We must work to enrich the quality of American life at work, at play, and in our homes.
We can ensure that older Americans will have nothing to fear from the ravages of runaway inflation, from the flaws in the social security system, from the threat of crime, or from the costly burdens of catastrophic illness.
Today you are concerned about such serious problems as poverty, unemployment, crime, poor health, and unsuitable housing on Indian reservations. I share your concern. I am hopeful about the future and about what we can achieve by continuing to work together.
--to attack crime and drugs; and
--to attack many other important matters.
I called for a major overhaul of criminal laws to crack down on crime and illegal drugs. The other party's platform deplores America's $90 billion cost of crime. There is the problem again--their own Congress won't act.
Number four, crime. As I said in the acceptance speech, we will not tolerate the kind of crime rate increases that have taken place over the last 3 or 4 years. And we will have not only a reiteration of what I have said in three or four speeches on the crime issue but also some new thoughts and ideas that will be announced during the campaign.
They really incorporate five points: jobs, ownership, quality health care, a reduction in crime, and better recreation facilities, and one other that falls under that category, and that is in the field of education.
THE PRESIDENT. About 9 months ago I sent to the Congress a very specific plan that called for stiffer penalties, mandatory penalties, in the area of individuals who commit major crimes using a gun, specific recommendations that do something affirmatively about the illegal drug traffic, et cetera.
If the Congress would help us with that, instead of doing nothing--I pointed it out very emphatically in the acceptance speech--we would have many more tools to do something to reduce crime rather than let it drift as it is. But I indicated a few moments ago, we will have some additional proposals between now and November 2.
A free people must never capitulate to terrorism. That is why I long ago asked for mandatory prison sentences for airplane hijackers. Certainty of punishment prevents crime. I have strongly urged international action to stamp out terrorism wherever it occurs.
We will talk about the domestic problems--jobs, homeownership, better health, better crime control, more recreation, better education--and then we will point out some of the things that we are doing and must do in the area of foreign policy.
--Americans want physical security, safety against war and crime, safety against pollution in the water we drink and in the air we breathe.
The prevention of crime is essential to making our lives secure. The Constitution demands that we ensure domestic tranquility, and that is what I called for in my crime message to the Congress about a year ago. Most crimes are committed by hardened, career criminals who know no other life than the life of crime. The place for those people is not on our streets but in the jails. The rights of the law-abiding society, the rights of the innocent victims of crime must be fully protected.
But I think that now is the time to heal our country after the Vietnam war. And I think that what the people are concerned about is not the pardon or the amnesty of those who evaded the draft, but whether or not our crime system is fair.
We have got a sharp distinction drawn between white collar crime. The big shots who are rich, who are influential, very seldom go to jail. Those who are poor and who have no influence quite often are the ones who are punished. And the whole subject of crime is one that concerns our people very much. And I believe that the fairness of it is what is the major problem that addresses our leader, and this is something that hasn't been addressed adequately by this administration.
Ms. DREW. Mr. President, at Vail, after the Republican convention, you announced that you would now emphasize five new areas. Among those were jobs and housing and health, improved recreational facilities for Americans, and you also added crime. You also mentioned education.
We believe that we can do a better job in the area of crime, but that requires tougher sentencing-mandatory, certain prison sentences for those who violate our criminal laws. We believe that you can revise the Federal Criminal Code, which has not been revised in a good many years. That doesn't cost any more money. We believe that you can do something more effectively with a moderate increase in money in the drug abuse program.
But, as we look at the quality of life programs-jobs, health, education, crime, recreation-we feel that as we move forward with a healthier economy, we can absorb the small, necessary costs that will be required.
Now we have some new problems to solve to improve the quality of our lives: a job for everybody who wants to work, a house for everybody who will work and save so he can have that home in a decent neighborhood, the best health care in the world, the solution to the problem of crime, and greater opportunities for recreation. Those are the visions and the goals of all of us in Lutcher, in Gramercy, in Louisiana, in Michigan, California, and in Texas.
That means a good job for everybody who wants to work. That means a home for every family that wants to work and save. That means the best medical care that we can give to our people. That means freedom on the streets from crime. That means an opportunity for all of us to enjoy the blessings of our national parks and recreation areas. But it also means that we are at peace. And the United States is strong enough to maintain the peace, and we are diplomatically skillful enough to keep the peace. This is the vision, this is what we want as all Americans in all 50 States, and we are going to get it under the Ford administration.
Some of us are deeply concerned, as you are, about the crime rate in this country, but we've made some progress. Two years ago, the crime rate was 18 percent. Last year it was 9 percent, and for the first 6 months of this year the crime rate is 3 percent, and that's a lot of progress. And we can take some credit for it, and we will.
We want a better quality of life now that we have taken care of the immediate problems. What we want is a job for everybody who wants to work, a meaningful job. And I won't be satisfied until we have a job for everybody who wants a job and who will look for a job. And I don't mean a dead-end job for the Government. I mean a job where you have got an opportunity for advancement, where you can make yourself a career. We also want everybody who will work and save to have a home in a decent neighborhood. And under the next 4 years of this administration, that is what we will get. And we want to get rid of crime on our streets. We want to give people the kind of health care that they can afford. Nobody should have to go broke just to get well.
But let's talk about some of the things that we want for the young people, the old people, and all of us. We have to think of the quality of life now that we have gotten our economy turned around and we are out of Vietnam and trust has been restored in the White House. We want everybody to have a job that wants a job--a meaningful job, not a dead-end job under some of these subsidized programs. We want the economy of this country to give the people of this country a job where they can have an opportunity for advancement, to better themselves, and have some security. We want the American people, those who will work and save, to have a decent home in a decent neighborhood. We want the crime problem solved, and we are making headway in that regard. We want the best health care for your people so they can afford what is available. There's no reason why anybody in this country should go broke just to get well.
Then we have extricated ourselves from Vietnam. We have peace. We have the military strength and the diplomatic skill to keep the peace. We don't do it through the draft, we do it through an all-volunteer military force. And we are going to keep the peace not only at borne by doing a better job in solving our problems of crime but we are going to give the leadership throughout this whole world to keep the peace that is so essential so the blessings of America can be spread beyond our own shores.
Then, every one of us for the last 4 or 5 years has worried about crime. The crime rate went up in 1974. It dropped off a little in 1975. We have some encouraging news in the first 6 months of 1976. It is down to a net gain of 3 percent. But we have to make certain, under our crime legislation, in the courts of this country, that the people who commit the crimes go to jail so that we can protect the innocent victims of crime in America.
We must respond to the suffering of all the victims of crime in our society. Consider the great emphasis is now placed on the rights of the accused, we must pay more attention to the rights of the victim of crime. I am shocked, I am angered that our older and least advantaged citizens are too often brutally victimized day after day after day. It is equally shocking that the Congress has failed to act on my proposal to provide compensation for the victims of Federal crime. I have urged that similar action be taken by State governments. Seventeen States have enacted crime compensation legislation, and a number of others are considering such statutes.
No President and no police chief can preserve domestic tranquility without cooperation--the cooperation of American citizens, America's neighborhoods, and America's communities. That is why I address myself to all Americans who are determined to act against crime.
The cost of crime in America has been estimated at $97 billion a year, almost as much as the entire defense budget. But even that figure, high as it is, does not take into full account the terrible impact of crime on our society. We cannot count in dollars, we cannot count in cents, the loss of a single citizen who is murdered, the humiliation of one who is raped, the pain of one who is assaulted. We cannot calculate the cost to a free society when people are forced to barricade themselves in their own homes. It is time to give the streets back to the law-abiding citizens and put the criminals behind bars.
Study after study has shown that crime is not the work of many offenders but of a relatively small number of chronic lawbreakers who have chosen crime as a career. The career criminal is a one-man crime wave. He commits between 50 and 80 percent of all serious crimes. In Washington, D.C., one man recently confessed to 50 rapes, 80 burglaries, 10 armed robberies, and more stolen cars than he could remember. The LEAA has reported that 49 criminals, unbelievable, acting individually, committed over 10,500 crimes.
You in this great audience know the criminals. Their names appear on police blotters and court dockets every day. They have been on probation, in halfway houses, and on parole. They had every chance for rehabilitation, but nothing has worked. It is no encroachment on the presumption of innocence to identify those whose business is crime. Our job is to put them out of business--the sooner the better.
Two years ago I outlined to this association a career criminal program. Under the auspices of LEAA, we targeted 12 jurisdictions for an initial demonstration. In the last 16 months those jurisdictions have singled out more than 2,000 career criminals with an average of five prior convictions apiece--not five arrests, but five convictions apiece. New cases involving these habitual offenders were assigned to special units of the district attorney's offices. Every right of the accused was protected, including the right to a speedy trial. With absolutely no plea bargaining for lesser offenses, the prosecutors achieved dramatic results. Of those 2,000 defendants, 95 percent were convicted. The average time between arrests and final sentencing was only 84 days. The average sentence for those convicted was 20 years in prison in most cases. The crime rate demonstrably went down. That's success.
The national trend is that less than 10 percent of those convicted spend any time in jail. This is intolerable and indefensible. Our Constitution reserves jurisdiction over most crimes to State and local authorities, but in offenses where the Constitution gives jurisdiction to the Federal Government and, therefore, gives the President some say in the matter--kidnapping, hijacking, trafficking in hard drugs, and Federal crimes involving use of dangerous weapons--I have proposed mandatory sentences. If convicted, they go to jail. We are going to stop letting convicted criminals go free. That's the way to deter crime and protect the victims of crime.
Law enforcement officers have the primary responsibility for fighting violent crime, but crime is so pervasive it can be brought under control only by concerted actions at all levels of government--Federal, State, and local--and by the cooperation of law-abiding citizens and police volunteer groups.
Two years ago I made a solemn pledge to you, the police chiefs, that a high priority of my administration would be the control of crime, especially violent crime. Since 1974 we have been making real progress. In 1974 the crime rate had increased by a staggering 18 percent over the previous year. By 1975 we had cut the rate of increase in half, to 9 percent. Statistics for the first 6 months of this year show the increase in the rate of crime reduced to about 3 percent. Even better, the new figures reveal that the rate of violent crime has actually decreased for the first time in many, many years. The violent crimes of murder, forcible rape, robbery, and aggravated assault decreased 6 percent in the first 6 months of 1976. I congratulate you, but we're going to do better in the future.
There is a new and wonderful attitude in America. Americans who have reverence for the law are fighting back. We must not stop until we tear away the shroud of fear from every corner of America to control rural and suburban crime, as well as that in the big cities.
The criminal justice system cannot, by itself, control crime. Further reduction of the crime rate requires involvement of all of our fellow Americans. The family and the neighborhood are our best defenses against crime. Family responsibility, not government programs, is the best way to make sure children are properly nurtured, the elderly are cared for, our cultural and spiritual heritage preserved, and our laws respected. The police can do little to curb juvenile delinquency without the family's full cooperation.
We hear more about the rights of juvenile defenders or offenders than about the rights of their victims. Forty-five percent of all violent crime is now perpetrated by juveniles. If they are big enough to commit vicious crimes against society, they are big enough to be punished by society. Too many violent and streetwise juveniles are using their age as a cloak of immunity. Detention may not help the juvenile, but it will certainly help his potential victims.
Genuine job opportunities for young people provide a constructive alternative to crime. We're making progress in this area, and we'll do better as our economy continues to improve. If rehabilitation is to become a reality instead of the pretense that it is today, the private sector must do more to provide jobs for those who have paid their debt to society.
In my crime message to Congress, I called for a comprehensive Federal Criminal Code to serve as a model for State and local governments. I called for mandatory minimum sentences for certain Federal crimes and for violent, repeat offenders. I called for legislation increasing the number of Federal judges. I called for the compensation of the victims of Federal crime. The Congress has done nothing.
Too many politicians today are underestimating the public concern about crime. Just as the police identify career criminals, American voters will examine their ballots in November and identify those candidates who have demonstrated indifference or permissiveness toward crime, and they should.
I serve notice today, that a top priority of the first 100 days, beginning with Inauguration Day for the Ford administration next January, will be the rallying of America behind Federal anticrime legislation. I ask every police chief in America and every citizen to join in that crusade. I recommend strict controls and more stringent penalties to stamp out the threat of political terrorism which is totally alien to American ideals.
In addition, I ask all athletes, amateur and professional, to help our young people. Our athletes in America can score high by providing youth with alternatives to crime. Kids who are playing football, baseball, basketball, and tennis are not kids committing crimes against society. Heroes of sports, instead of criminals, are the models for youngsters to look up to. I have directed my Council on Physical Fitness and Sports, in partnership with State and local authorities and private organizations, to promote team play rather than foul play, and we will.
The Federal Government shares direct responsibility for organized crime, white-collar crime, and official corruption. The Department of Justice has made great strides in combating this kind of crime.
To ensure that this Federal effort is fully coordinated, I will establish an interagency council on crime. It will include the heads of all Federal agencies operating programs involved with crime. It will be directed by the Attorney General of the United States, who will do a first-class job. One of the first jobs of the council will be to review the policies of major domestic agencies and recommend changes to lower the crime rate. The council will develop a comprehensive 5-year plan for crime control and criminal justice through the Federal Government.
We all know, tragic as it is, as much as one-half of all street crime today is committed by drug addicts to support their habit. Since taking office, I have reorganized our programs and priorities to make maximum use of our anti-drug resources at the Federal level. I met with the heads of state of Mexico, Colombia, and Turkey to secure their cooperation in the international war on drugs. I proposed legislation which would close the loopholes that permit drug traffickers to prey on the young. I directed the Internal Revenue Service to reinstitute and emphasize a tax enforcement program aimed at high-level drug traffickers. Since then, the IRS, aided by the Drug Enforcement Administration, has identified over 375 suspected big-time pushers for intensive investigation and action. And I called for more than three-quarters of a billion dollars in a year, a single 12-month period, to finance the fight against drug abuse.
You know better than I, because you see it every day on the streets of your cities or in the areas of your States, crime is a terrible, terrible enemy to all of us. But we can beat it, and we will beat it.
But victory requires a continued, clear, and predictable policy. It requires real reverence for the law. I know that I can count on you and millions of others--millions and millions of law-abiding Americans--who believe with you and me, with us, that by fighting crime we are building freedom for all Americans.
Two days ago in Miami, Florida, I declared a major new escalation in America's war on crime. I outlined plans as follows: to completely revise the Federal Criminal Code; to expand the demonstrably successful career criminal program; to impose mandatory sentences for certain Federal crimes; to explore new ways of preventing juvenile crime; and to take other steps to make the Federal fight against crime a model for State and local efforts throughout the Nation.
We are now providing the most sophisticated equipment, the best training, and the greatest financial and moral support that we can. But it is these courageous men and women themselves who stand on the front lines of America's war on crime. They take the risks, they suffer the injuries, and they are the ones why lay their lives on the line every day for the rest of us in this country.
We must make sure that our streets and campuses are free from the threat of violent crime. We must try harder to protect our environment, to purify the water that we drink and the air that we breathe. We must enlarge our capacity for recreation, enrich and preserve our treasure of natural beauty and our heritage of history throughout America.
But we have to have a healthy economy at home, and that means a job for everybody who wants a job; it means a home for everybody who will work for it and save for it. And that means we have to get rid of the crime on the streets so that you and your children will be free of any terrorism, either at home or abroad. It means that you have to have the best education, the kind of health care that you need and that you can afford.
So, we want only good health, good education, a better tax system, responsible action in meeting the problems of crime, equality of life in America.
But we want to give a better quality of life right here in America. What we want is a job for everybody who wants to work, and we will get him a job. We want a home for everybody who will work and save for it, and we are going to get that under the next 4 years. We want to be certain that you can walk down this street or that street and be safe, and we are going to take care of the crime problem in America, period.
Just as I am determined to fight terrorism throughout the world, I will do everything in my power to fight terrorism in our own streets and neighborhoods, in New York and throughout the United States. We all know, from the records and from personal experiences, there have been too many muggings and too many murders. The time has come to lock up those who make a career of crime and give the streets back to the people.
THE PRESIDENT. My vision for America, first, is that we shall be a nation at peace, as we are today. My vision of the next 4 years is also that we will have a better quality of life; that we will have our younger people having a better opportunity for quality education; that every person who wants a job will have a job; that the best health care will be available at prices people can afford; that we will have a record of safety and security in the streets of America for those 215 million Americans who ought to be able to walk in their community or any other part of the country without the threat of crime. My vision would also include an opportunity for greater recreation capability.
In other words, peace, a job, better health, better education, no crime--or control over the criminal situation--and a better opportunity for recreation-those are the visions that I have.
Another area of great concern to older Americans is the special threat to their well-being posed by crime. Our older citizens have earned the right to live securely and to walk the streets without fear. That is why I was particularly gratified by a provision in the Crime Control Act, which I recently signed. This new provision requires that State crime control plans deal specifically and very firmly with the criminal attacks which are made against our senior citizens.
If we go the way that our platform calls for, the way I believe and Bob Dole believes, we can keep the peace that has been achieved through the strength of our military capability and our diplomatic skill. We can enlarge the opportunities for economic progress so that we can honestly say that there will be a job for every American who wants a job. There will be a home in a decent neighborhood for every person or couple that wants to work and save and buy a home. It's the direction of security on the streets for our young as well as our old, against crime in America. It means giving to the American people the best medical care available at affordable prices. It means greater opportunities for recreation in the wonderful, scenic places we have all over America. It means that the American people can live in a society where there has been healing, not division; where we can disagree without being disagreeable; where we can look forward in the next 4 years and far beyond to a quality of life, peace abroad and peace at home, with prosperity for all. That's the direction we want to go, and that's what is going to win November 2.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Maynard, the record of gun control, whether it's in one city or another or in some States does not show that the registration of a gun, handgun, or the registration of the gun owner has in any way whatsoever decreased the crime rate or the use of that gun in the committing of a crime. The record just doesn't prove that such legislation or action by a local city council is effective.
What we have to do--and this is the crux of the matter--is to make it very, very difficult for a person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime to stay out of jail. If we make the use of a gun in the commission of a crime a serious criminal offense and that person is prosecuted, then in my opinion we are going after the person who uses the gun for the wrong reason. I don't believe in the registration of handguns or the registration of the handgun owner. That has not proven to be effective. And, therefore, I think the better way is to go after the criminal, the individual who commits a crime in the possession of a gun and uses that gun for a part of his criminal activity.
Those are the people who ought to be in jail. And the only way to do it is to pass strong legislation so that once apprehended, indicted, convicted, they will be in jail and off the streets and not using guns in the commission of a crime.
MR. MAYNARD. But, Mr. President, don't you think that the proliferation of the availability of handguns contributes to the possibility of those crimes being committed? And there is a second part to my follow-up. Very quickly, there are, as you know and as you've said, jurisdictions around the country with strong gun control laws. The police officials in those cities contend that if there were a national law to prevent other jurisdictions from providing the weapons that then come into places like New York, that they might have a better handle on the problem. Have you considered that in your analysis of the handgun proliferation problem?
I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun. And the only purpose that I would see in registering handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the ownership of those guns by those who have used them in the commission of a crime or who have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun. I believe that limited approach to the question would be advisable, and I think adequate, but that's as far as I would go with it.
I believe, however, a comment ought to be made about the direction of the Burger Court vis-a-vis the Court that preceded it. It seems to me that the Miranda case was a case that really made it very, very difficult for the police, the law enforcement people in this country, to do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes were properly handled and sent to jail. The Miranda case, the Burger Court is gradually changing. And I am pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the Burger Court to modify the so-called Miranda decision.
The problem of crime--when I became President in 1974, the rate of crime in America was at 18 percent--unbelievable. In 1975, it was cut back 50 percent to 9 percent. That is still too high. But the encouraging news is that in the first 6 months of 1976, the rate of increase is 3 percent, and we have had significant reduction in some of the more serious areas of crime.
Let me tell you one way in which we have tried to solve the problem. All the experts tell us there is a group in our society--hardened criminals, professional criminals--they impose upon all of us law-abiding people a very high percentage of the crime committed in America. And so, we have in the last 12 months had a career criminal program. It has resulted in a significant number of hardened career criminals being apprehended, convicted--95 percent of them have gone to jail, and that is where they belong, and that is where they better stay.
Fourth, older Americans are concerned about crime. I believe greater emphasis should be placed on protecting the potential victim of crime. The career criminal program, which I initiated in several key cities last year, identifies habitual criminals, sets up special prosecution procedures, and in 95 percent of the cases, results in the conviction of those brought to trial with prison sentences that average more than 20 years.
In 200 years as a free people much has changed in our Nation, but America's basic goals remain the same. Americans want a job with a good future; Americans want homes in decent neighborhoods and schools with quality education; Americans want physical security, safety against war, and safety against crime; safety against pollution in the water we drink and in the air that we breathe; we want medical and hospital care when we are sick and costs that will not wipe out our savings; we want the time and the opportunity to enlarge our experience through recreation and through travel, both at home and abroad.
And then, of course, of all the people in this great country who need most the protection from crime--it's our older senior citizens. So, we've got to do something in the quality of life area to make certain, to make positive, that those who commit a crime are convicted and go to jail.
My administration has always felt that the emphasis should be on the victims of crime, not the people that commit the crimes. Let me tell you what we're trying to do. There are, unfortunately, in our society, some who are what we call hardened criminals, career criminals. Starting better than a year ago, we tried in 12 cities, a program of helping State and local law enforcement officers, the courts, with a career criminal program. They went in there and they identified two or three or five career criminals, and they went after them with an amazing rate of success.
I want to talk with you this morning about one of the greatest concerns of this campaign. The issue is crime.
For too long, the fear of crime has cast its ominous shadow on the streets of America. For too long, the conscientious efforts of law enforcement officers throughout America have been compromised by a system of "revolving-door" justice and by a lack of adequate community involvement in crime prevention. For too long the rights of the victims of crime have not had the same protection as the rights of the criminal defendants.
During the past 2 years we have begun to make headway against crime in America. In 1974 the crime rate increased by 18 percent. Last year the increase was down to 9 percent. And for the first 6 months of this year, the increase in the overall crime rate was only 3 percent. The incidence of violent crime--murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault--actually went down.
Second, I have proposed strict, automatic prison sentences for those convicted of such Federal crimes as hijacking and kidnaping and for those who use a gun or other dangerous weapon in the commission of a crime.
We have also established a Public Integrity Section within the Justice Department to discover and prosecute official corruption. Furthermore, my administration is now devoting more resources to combat white collar crime than any other administration in history.
Most important, I have asked for a new, active spirit of cooperation from you, the American people, to help us defeat our common enemy--crime.
In the midst of all of this, it is not surprising that education and our children suffer. Headlines, if not personal family experiences, tell us that crime in the schools is a very serious problem. The National Education Association reports that over the past few years, there has been a dramatic increase in school crime and school violence.
Nobody in this country can feel safe unless we do something effectively about crime in America. We have made significant progress in the last 2 years in reducing the rate of crime, but I'm not satisfied, nor are you. There are two programs that must be implemented: The hardened career criminal who is a repetitive individual in robbing or stealing must go to jail, and that person must stay in jail.
But one final observation: We have an obligation to our older people. We have an obligation to do better in the reduction of the rate of crime. We have an obligation to make sure that our water is clear and our air is free. We have an obligation to make certain that the quality of life, so that an individual, a family can buy that home in a decent neighborhood, so that health care is available at affordable prices, so that recreational opportunities are available for all of you.
We are going to have quality education. We are going to have health care that is affordable, the best in the world. We are going to see to it that the criminal element in this country goes into prison and the victims of crime are protected.
I want it so that young and old, that all of our 215 million Americans, can walk those streets in Rochester, New York, Detroit, Grand Rapids, in safety and security. We are going to lick the problem of crime in America. And we want a quality education for all Americans. We are going to have the best health care. People will be able to afford it.
But, in addition, we have some other problems. We will do a better job in the next 4 years in making certain that the victims of crime are protected and that the criminal goes to jail. We will do a better job to help our older people, who have earned our respect and our support. We will do a better job in meeting some of the problems of our major metropolitan areas.
So, I ask you to listen to where I stand: I stand for lower taxes. I stand for more jobs. I stand for a balanced budget. I stand for less Federal spending. I stand for winning the battle against inflation. I stand for a clean environment. I stand for less crime. I stand for peace and liberty all over the world, and that is where we are today.
We have cut the growth of crime by nearly 90 percent. Two years ago crime was increasing at the rate of 18 percent annually. In the first three quarters of 1976, that growth rate had been cut to 2 percent. But crime, and the fear of crime, remains one of the most serious problems facing our citizens.
On the higher plane of public morality, there is no need for me to preach tonight. We have thousands of far better preachers and millions of sacred scriptures to guide us on the path of personal right-living and exemplary official conduct. If we can make effective and earlier use of moral and ethical wisdom of the centuries in today's complex society, we will prevent more crime and more corruption than all the policemen and prosecutors governments can ever deter. If I might say so, this is a job that must begin at home, not in Washington.

The pardon power entrusted to the President under the Constitution of the United States has a long history and rests on precedents going back centuries before our Constitution was drafted and adopted. The power has been used sometimes as Alexander Hamilton saw its purpose: "In seasons of insurrection... when a well-timed offer of pardon to the insurgents or rebels may restore the tranquillity of the commonwealth; and which, if suffered to pass unimproved, it may never be possible afterwards to recall."1 Other times it has been applied to one person as "an act of grace... which exempts the individual, on whom it is bestowed, from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed."2 When a pardon is granted, it also represents "the determination of the ultimate authority that the public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment fixed."3 However, the Constitution does not limit the pardon power to cases of convicted offenders or even indicted offenders.4 Thus, I am firm in my conviction that as President I did have the authority to proclaim a pardon for the former President when I did.
I think, from the mail I have received from all over the country, as well as my own district, I know that the people want to understand how you can explain having pardoned Richard Nixon without specifying any of the crimes for which he was pardoned. And how can you explain pardoning Richard Nixon without obtaining any acknowledgement of guilt from him? How do you explain the failure to consult the Attorney General of the United States with respect to the issuance of the pardon, even though in your confirmation hearings you had indicated the Attorney General's opinion would be critical in any decision to pardon the former President?
Frankly, I am concerned at some of the questioning by my colleagues, asking questions, if all men are not equal under the law, because certainly, being the outstanding lawyers that they are, they know that the pardoning power itself is inherently inequitable, but for a larger purpose, it grants to the Chief Executive of the Federal Government or the State, in the case of State crimes, to pardon individuals who may or have been indicted or convicted of crimes.
And I am not going to take this particular opportunity to urge the people of Cleveland to reelect Mayor Ralph Perk, who in his first year as mayor reduced crime in this city by 26 percent and who has restored financial stability to this city's government.
But the problem is it will be disastrous for America. It will be disastrous in Ohio, in Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, Illinois, New Jersey, North Carolina. So, use your influence to get the right decision in the free society in which we live.Now, I happen to think we can declare America's independence from the fear and the alarming growth of crime. As I said earlier, Ralph Perk, as your good mayor, has done a fine job. And I happen to think, if the Congress would move, we can declare America's independence from foreign oil and energy sources.
Let me say this: In my crime message, which was submitted to the Congress several weeks ago, I strongly supported, as I think it is absolutely essential, legislation to expand the jurisdiction of Federal magistrates. You know better than I that the expansion of that responsibility can be very helpful in alleviating some of the caseload problems in the Federal judicial system.
In addition, in this crime message, I did propose action on the scope and the process of Federal jurisdiction, including the range of diversity, jurisdiction, the advisability of three-judge courts, possible avenues of Federal-State cooperation, and related proposals--all of which could be materially beneficial in reducing the caseload.
The independent voter wants the scales of justice to balance the right of the criminal defendant with the rights of a law-abiding society, and so do we. Our crime program is aimed at domestic tranquillity, with deep concern for the victim of crime. And the independent voter wants that as well.
I have decided, however, to discuss with you today another subject high on my agenda, one that affects every American and every Californian, one in which the role and the responsibility of State officials is even greater than that of the Federal Establishment; that is, the truly alarming increase in violent crime throughout this country.
I come to California not only to plead for this kind of Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime but to praise the progress you have already begun in California.
California has long been a leader in both law enforcement and criminal justice. The rate of increase in violent crimes here remains less than the national average. For the first quarter of this year, serious crime rose 18 percent for the Nation as a whole. It rose only 13 percent in California.
But both figures, I am sure we agree, are far, far too high. The rate for forcible rape was down, but murder was up 22 percent in California and robbery up 23 percent. What is more distressing, my good friend Evelle Younger 1 tells me that nearly 4 out of every 10 persons convicted of using firearms to kill someone or to rob someone were given probation. Approximately 2,300 persons convicted of violent crimes involving firearms are returned to the streets of California each year without serving a prison sentence.
Clearly, the billions of dollars spent at all levels of government since 1960 have not done the job of stemming the rise in crime. The reported crime rate has doubled, and unreported crimes have probably multiplied even more.
As a former lawmaker among active lawmakers, let me put before you three simple propositions about crime.
While it is true that not all men--nor all women--are angels, it is also true that the vast majority of Americans are law-abiding. In one study of 10,000 males born in 1945, it was shown that only 6 percent of them perpetrated two-thirds of all crimes committed by the entire sample.
As for serious crimes, most are committed by repeaters. Another study in a major metropolitan area showed that within a single year, more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were the work of only 10 individual criminals.
I am not suggesting that due process should be ignored or the legal rights of defendants be reduced. I am not urging a vindictive attitude toward convicted offenders. I am saying that, as a matter of public policy, the time has come to give equal weight on the scale of justice to the rights of the innocent victims of crimes of terror and violence.
Victims are my primary concern, and I am sure that is your primary concern. They should be the concern of all of us who have a role in making or executing or enforcing or interpreting the criminal law--Federal, State, or local. The vast majority of victims of violent crime in this country are the poor, the old, the very young, the disadvantaged minorities, the people who crowd our urban centers, the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
My third proposition is this: If most serious crimes are committed by repeaters, most violent crimes by criminals carrying guns, if the tiny minority of habitual lawbreakers can be identified by modern datakeeping methods, then is it not mandatory that such offenders, duly tried and convicted, be removed from society for a definite period of time rather than returning to the streets to continue to prey on the innocent and the law-abiding majority?
Although only a very limited number of violent crimes fall under Federal jurisdiction, I have urged the Congress to set an example by providing for mandatory prison terms for convicted offenders in such extraordinarily serious crimes as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and trafficking in hard drugs. I also advocate mandatory sentences for persons found guilty of crimes involving use of dangerous weapons and for repeat offenders, with or without a weapon, whose crimes show a potential or actual cause of physical injury. There will, of course, be sensible exceptions, but they must be minimal.
I hope all 50 States will follow suit. Far too many violent and repetitive criminals never spend a day in prison after conviction. Mandatory sentences need not be severe. It is the certainty of confinement that is presently lacking. We will never deter crime nor reduce its growth if potential lawbreakers feel they have favorable odds of escaping punishment. The more experienced in crime they get, the better their odds of not suffering the consequences. That is wrong, and it must be reversed, and the quicker, the better.
The temptation to politicians--and I trust we are all politicians here and proud of it--I am--is to call for a massive crackdown on crime and to advocate throwing every convicted felon in jail and throwing the key away.
We have heard such cries for years, and crime continues to gain on us. The problem is infinitely more complex than any updated vigilante mentality can cope with. We have to confess, you and I, that we do not know all of the answers. But as with other stubborn national problems, my philosophy is that we must take one sure step at a time. It is simply intolerable to stand still or slip backwards. It is simply impossible to devise a swift cure-all or a quick fix.
In a talk to my alma mater and to yours, Mr. Governor, the Yale Law School, last April, and again in a detailed message .to the Congress in June, I outlined the first steps which I believe must be taken to get a handle on the rising crime rates. I will not rehash these points today, except to thank the California Legislature for moving somewhat faster than Congress has on some of my recommendations, such as mandatory prison sentences for crimes involving firearms and hard drug pushing.
I told the Congress, not as a cop-out, but as a constitutional fact of life, that the Federal effort in the fight against crime really depends on the massive support from the States, which quite properly have sole jurisdiction in the exercise of most police powers.
As for LEAA, I must say candidly that it hasn't done as much to help curb the rising crime statistics as we had hoped. But it has encouraged experimentation and pilot projects in law enforcement and criminal justice which, if they work, can be adopted by other States. Some of the outstanding ones have been funded for California's own department of justice dealing with organized crime and criminal intelligence and to Sacramento and San Diego Counties for programs on juvenile delinquency, white-collar crime, fraud, drugs, and career criminals.
The drug problem in America could make several speeches by itself. Here again we have a very small number of deliberate criminals who destroy the domestic tranquillity of millions and millions of decent citizens. What is particularly outrageous is the tragedy they bring to young people who should be learning to face life, not run from it.
Loss of liberty is both a deterrent to crime and a prevention of repeated crime, at least while the offender is behind bars. Prisoners should be treated humanely, and we cannot expect judges, Mr. Chief Justice,2 and juries to convict and sentence the guilty to places of confinement that are cruel and degrading.
But I consider it essential that we reduce delay in bringing arrested persons to trial, sharply limit the prevailing practice of plea bargaining caused by congested prosecutor and court calendars, and significantly increase the proportion of those convicted of violent crimes and repeated crimes who actually serve time in prison.
I commend the State of California for its ongoing efforts in these areas as well as for your program, or programs to prevent juvenile crime and to rehabilitate youthful first-time offenders.
One of the worst aspects of the current rise in crime rates has been that almost half of all arrests are persons under 18 years of age. While imprisonment is clearly the way to put hardened criminals out of business for a period of time, it is obviously not the best way to deal with the very young. Yet, simply sending them home has not proved a very satisfactory solution, either.
Another aspect of the crime program that I have submitted--I asked the Congress to write into the revised Federal Criminal Code the stronger provisions to allow Federal action against organized crime wherever it rears its ugly head. The leaders of organized crime do not recognize State or, for that matter, national boundaries. It will take all of our law enforcement resources to fight this giant conspiracy against domestic tranquillity and prevent its spread.
Like other vexing problems facing California and the Nation, we will not conquer crime with a single roll call or a stroke of the Governor's or President's pen. But we must do what we can, and we must work together here and now for the sake of our children and our grandchildren.
It was really for this reason that I wanted to discuss crime today and the common front that we must create against it. Peace in our neighborhoods and places of business is almost as important as peace in the world.
Nowhere is the community of interest and the necessity of close collaboration between the Federal Government and the States of the Union more obvious than in the field of crime control. There is no more universal longing among our people than to be free of fear and safe in their homes and in their livelihoods.
I have not brought along any patent medicine that cures all human ills to peddle here in California. I have come simply to pledge to you my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime in cooperation and consultation with you and with all who have America at heart.
In moving against crime, with compassion for the victims and evenhanded justice for the violator, California can be the pacesetter for the Nation, as you have been in so many other challenges.
THE PRESIDENT. I set that forth in a crime message to the Congress where I said, "Our concern today ought to be for the victims of crime." The crime message that I sent to the Congress calls for mandatory sentences for those that participate in a crime of violence using a gun, and we have urged the courts to increase their confinement of convicted criminals.
Too many criminals today, after they have been convicted, are put off on probation. There ought to be a penalty for the committing of a crime, and that means confinement. Whether it is 6 months or some other term, I believe mandatory sentences are required in certain crimes.
I believe the courts have to be firmer, and I think they--you know, it is unbelievable, but a very, very high percentage of crime today is done by a very limited number of people, professional criminals, and they ought to be behind the bars.
Now, I have also recommended to the Congress some legislation that would provide mandatory prison sentences for people who use guns in the carrying out of violent crime. I wish the Congress would pass that legislation. I wish State legislatures would do the same in those cases where they don't have such legislation. We have to prosecute, convict, and put in jail those people who illegally use guns. And if we do, I think we can have a substantial impact on the bad use of firearms.
THE PRESIDENT. Helen, as soon as I am convinced that the gun itself is the culprit. In actuality, it is the person who uses the gun that causes the trouble. What we have to do is to make certain that the people who use the gun are punished. And if you will recall from the crime message that I submitted to the Congress several months ago,1 we provided for stricter legislation so that a person using a gun in an attempt or in the actual committing of a crime, that person had a mandatory sentence and went to jail. This is the way, in my opinion, to prevent the illegal use of guns and not penalize the people who are collectors or individuals who properly use guns.
The balance on crime has shifted so heavily on concern for the rights of the criminals that the rights of their victims are almost forgotten. I say this with emphasis. This must stop.
On the higher plane of public morality, there is no need for me to preach tonight. We have thousands of far better preachers and millions of sacred scriptures to guide us on the path of personal right-living and exemplary official conduct. If we can make effective and earlier use of moral and ethical wisdom of the centuries in today's complex society, we will prevent more crime and more corruption than all the policemen and prosecutors governments can ever deter. If I might say so, this is a job that must begin at home, not in Washington.

And it is because of this "grand junction" of interest in ideals that I am optimistic when it comes to America. There are plenty of big problems that are waiting to be solved--inflation, energy, pollution, crime--to name only a few. But there is not one of them that we as Americans can't lick if we pull together and act responsibly. There is, however, one thing our elected officials must remember. No government can expect the people to act responsibly when it fails to do so itself.
Many of the problems, for example, of cities remain unsolved. And I should say with great emphasis, I am dedicated to turning around the trend of deterioration and despair, of crime and unemployment, of pollution and bad housing, and of drugs and premature death. But I am also dedicated to the conviction that local problems must, in the final analysis, be solved by local people. The Federal Government has helped and will continue to help.
Let me say this: In my crime message, which was submitted to the Congress several weeks ago, I strongly supported, as I think it is absolutely essential, legislation to expand the jurisdiction of Federal magistrates. You know better than I that the expansion of that responsibility can be very helpful in alleviating some of the caseload problems in the Federal judicial system.
In addition, in this crime message, I did propose action on the scope and the process of Federal jurisdiction, including the range of diversity, jurisdiction, the advisability of three-judge courts, possible avenues of Federal-State cooperation, and related proposals--all of which could be materially beneficial in reducing the caseload.
The independent voter wants the scales of justice to balance the right of the criminal defendant with the rights of a law-abiding society, and so do we. Our crime program is aimed at domestic tranquillity, with deep concern for the victim of crime. And the independent voter wants that as well.
I have decided, however, to discuss with you today another subject high on my agenda, one that affects every American and every Californian, one in which the role and the responsibility of State officials is even greater than that of the Federal Establishment; that is, the truly alarming increase in violent crime throughout this country.
I come to California not only to plead for this kind of Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime but to praise the progress you have already begun in California.
California has long been a leader in both law enforcement and criminal justice. The rate of increase in violent crimes here remains less than the national average. For the first quarter of this year, serious crime rose 18 percent for the Nation as a whole. It rose only 13 percent in California.
But both figures, I am sure we agree, are far, far too high. The rate for forcible rape was down, but murder was up 22 percent in California and robbery up 23 percent. What is more distressing, my good friend Evelle Younger 1 tells me that nearly 4 out of every 10 persons convicted of using firearms to kill someone or to rob someone were given probation. Approximately 2,300 persons convicted of violent crimes involving firearms are returned to the streets of California each year without serving a prison sentence.
Clearly, the billions of dollars spent at all levels of government since 1960 have not done the job of stemming the rise in crime. The reported crime rate has doubled, and unreported crimes have probably multiplied even more.
As a former lawmaker among active lawmakers, let me put before you three simple propositions about crime.
While it is true that not all men--nor all women--are angels, it is also true that the vast majority of Americans are law-abiding. In one study of 10,000 males born in 1945, it was shown that only 6 percent of them perpetrated two-thirds of all crimes committed by the entire sample.
As for serious crimes, most are committed by repeaters. Another study in a major metropolitan area showed that within a single year, more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were the work of only 10 individual criminals.
I am not suggesting that due process should be ignored or the legal rights of defendants be reduced. I am not urging a vindictive attitude toward convicted offenders. I am saying that, as a matter of public policy, the time has come to give equal weight on the scale of justice to the rights of the innocent victims of crimes of terror and violence.
Victims are my primary concern, and I am sure that is your primary concern. They should be the concern of all of us who have a role in making or executing or enforcing or interpreting the criminal law--Federal, State, or local. The vast majority of victims of violent crime in this country are the poor, the old, the very young, the disadvantaged minorities, the people who crowd our urban centers, the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
My third proposition is this: If most serious crimes are committed by repeaters, most violent crimes by criminals carrying guns, if the tiny minority of habitual lawbreakers can be identified by modern datakeeping methods, then is it not mandatory that such offenders, duly tried and convicted, be removed from society for a definite period of time rather than returning to the streets to continue to prey on the innocent and the law-abiding majority?
Although only a very limited number of violent crimes fall under Federal jurisdiction, I have urged the Congress to set an example by providing for mandatory prison terms for convicted offenders in such extraordinarily serious crimes as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and trafficking in hard drugs. I also advocate mandatory sentences for persons found guilty of crimes involving use of dangerous weapons and for repeat offenders, with or without a weapon, whose crimes show a potential or actual cause of physical injury. There will, of course, be sensible exceptions, but they must be minimal.
I hope all 50 States will follow suit. Far too many violent and repetitive criminals never spend a day in prison after conviction. Mandatory sentences need not be severe. It is the certainty of confinement that is presently lacking. We will never deter crime nor reduce its growth if potential lawbreakers feel they have favorable odds of escaping punishment. The more experienced in crime they get, the better their odds of not suffering the consequences. That is wrong, and it must be reversed, and the quicker, the better.
The temptation to politicians--and I trust we are all politicians here and proud of it--I am--is to call for a massive crackdown on crime and to advocate throwing every convicted felon in jail and throwing the key away.
We have heard such cries for years, and crime continues to gain on us. The problem is infinitely more complex than any updated vigilante mentality can cope with. We have to confess, you and I, that we do not know all of the answers. But as with other stubborn national problems, my philosophy is that we must take one sure step at a time. It is simply intolerable to stand still or slip backwards. It is simply impossible to devise a swift cure-all or a quick fix.
In a talk to my alma mater and to yours, Mr. Governor, the Yale Law School, last April, and again in a detailed message .to the Congress in June, I outlined the first steps which I believe must be taken to get a handle on the rising crime rates. I will not rehash these points today, except to thank the California Legislature for moving somewhat faster than Congress has on some of my recommendations, such as mandatory prison sentences for crimes involving firearms and hard drug pushing.
I told the Congress, not as a cop-out, but as a constitutional fact of life, that the Federal effort in the fight against crime really depends on the massive support from the States, which quite properly have sole jurisdiction in the exercise of most police powers.
As for LEAA, I must say candidly that it hasn't done as much to help curb the rising crime statistics as we had hoped. But it has encouraged experimentation and pilot projects in law enforcement and criminal justice which, if they work, can be adopted by other States. Some of the outstanding ones have been funded for California's own department of justice dealing with organized crime and criminal intelligence and to Sacramento and San Diego Counties for programs on juvenile delinquency, white-collar crime, fraud, drugs, and career criminals.
The drug problem in America could make several speeches by itself. Here again we have a very small number of deliberate criminals who destroy the domestic tranquillity of millions and millions of decent citizens. What is particularly outrageous is the tragedy they bring to young people who should be learning to face life, not run from it.
Loss of liberty is both a deterrent to crime and a prevention of repeated crime, at least while the offender is behind bars. Prisoners should be treated humanely, and we cannot expect judges, Mr. Chief Justice,2 and juries to convict and sentence the guilty to places of confinement that are cruel and degrading.
But I consider it essential that we reduce delay in bringing arrested persons to trial, sharply limit the prevailing practice of plea bargaining caused by congested prosecutor and court calendars, and significantly increase the proportion of those convicted of violent crimes and repeated crimes who actually serve time in prison.
I commend the State of California for its ongoing efforts in these areas as well as for your program, or programs to prevent juvenile crime and to rehabilitate youthful first-time offenders.
One of the worst aspects of the current rise in crime rates has been that almost half of all arrests are persons under 18 years of age. While imprisonment is clearly the way to put hardened criminals out of business for a period of time, it is obviously not the best way to deal with the very young. Yet, simply sending them home has not proved a very satisfactory solution, either.
Another aspect of the crime program that I have submitted--I asked the Congress to write into the revised Federal Criminal Code the stronger provisions to allow Federal action against organized crime wherever it rears its ugly head. The leaders of organized crime do not recognize State or, for that matter, national boundaries. It will take all of our law enforcement resources to fight this giant conspiracy against domestic tranquillity and prevent its spread.
Like other vexing problems facing California and the Nation, we will not conquer crime with a single roll call or a stroke of the Governor's or President's pen. But we must do what we can, and we must work together here and now for the sake of our children and our grandchildren.
It was really for this reason that I wanted to discuss crime today and the common front that we must create against it. Peace in our neighborhoods and places of business is almost as important as peace in the world.
Nowhere is the community of interest and the necessity of close collaboration between the Federal Government and the States of the Union more obvious than in the field of crime control. There is no more universal longing among our people than to be free of fear and safe in their homes and in their livelihoods.
I have not brought along any patent medicine that cures all human ills to peddle here in California. I have come simply to pledge to you my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime in cooperation and consultation with you and with all who have America at heart.
In moving against crime, with compassion for the victims and evenhanded justice for the violator, California can be the pacesetter for the Nation, as you have been in so many other challenges.
We have a lot of problems that have to be solved in this country. Louis Wyman understands some of those problems better than anybody that I know in Washington, as his record of attorney general speaks for itself. We have too much crime in America. Louis Wyman knows, as attorney general and as a Member of the Congress, how to effectively meet the challenge of crime in America.
Society has undergone vast changes in the past generation, and new ideas are constantly influencing our lives. New materialism, the pressures of modern life, new attitudes, social values, crime in our inner cities--all of these greatly affect the everyday life of the family. All of us have the responsibility to stand and support the standards we believe in. As religious people, stand up for your faith. I stand with you. We believe in the same God.
Fighting crime without the full commitment of the American people to a return to the moral values which made our Nation great is an expensive and completely hopeless enterprise. As Mr. Seidman 2 told us at lunch--and I think I quote him properly--he is looking for new directions to go back to old truths.
I believe that all of the money we have spent--and we have spent a great deal of money at the Federal level, about $800 million a year in the last 3 or 4 years--for what we call Law Enforcement Assistance Act programs, Federal money to States and local units of government, and unfortunately despite that vast expenditure of money, the crime rate continues to go up.
You talked just briefly about this in relation to the crime situation, but I wonder if you could give us a little more elaboration on how you think we can better focus in on this problem through the Bicentennial to get a better grip on moving forward with America.
THE PRESIDENT. I did recommend to the Congress early this year a rather comprehensive approach to crime control, a new proposal that would make it much more difficult for individuals to get what we call Saturday night specials, which are the cheap handguns that are used extensively for illegal purposes.
In addition, I proposed to the Congress that we have much more severe penalties for a person using a gun in the commission of some other crime and for mandatory sentences in order to get people who use guns in the process of committing a crime or alleged crime.
THE PRESIDENT. Helen, as soon as I am convinced that the gun itself is the culprit. In actuality, it is the person who uses the gun that causes the trouble. What we have to do is to make certain that the people who use the gun are punished. And if you will recall from the crime message that I submitted to the Congress several months ago,1 we provided for stricter legislation so that a person using a gun in an attempt or in the actual committing of a crime, that person had a mandatory sentence and went to jail. This is the way, in my opinion, to prevent the illegal use of guns and not penalize the people who are collectors or individuals who properly use guns.
My recommendations on how to control violent crime were submitted to the Congress last June with strong emphasis on protecting the innocent victims of crime. To keep a convicted criminal from committing more crimes, we must put him in prison so he cannot harm more law-abiding citizens. To be effective, this punishment must be swift and it must be certain.
To speed Federal justice, I propose an increase this year in the United States attorneys prosecuting Federal crimes and the reinforcement of the number of United States marshals. Additional Federal judges are needed, as recommended by me and the Judicial Conference.
Another major threat to every American's person and property is the criminal carrying a handgun. The way to cut down on the criminal use of guns is not to take guns away from the law-abiding citizen, but to impose mandatory sentences for crimes in which a gun is used, make it harder to obtain cheap guns for criminal purposes, and concentrate gun control enforcement in highcrime areas.
My budget recommends 500 additional Federal agents in the 11 largest metropolitan high-crime areas to help local authorities stop criminals from selling and using handguns.
I recommended months ago that the Congress enact mandatory fixed sentences for persons convicted of Federal crimes involving the sale of hard drugs. Hard drugs, we all know, degrade the spirit as they destroy the body of their users.
It is unrealistic and misleading to hold out the hope that the Federal Government can move into every neighborhood and clean up crime. Under the Constitution, the greatest responsibility for curbing crime lies with State and local authorities. They are the frontline fighters in the war against crime.
As President, I pledge the strict enforcement of Federal laws and--by example, support, and leadership--to help State and local authorities enforce their laws. Together, we must protect the victims of crime and ensure domestic tranquility.
The American people in 1976 are not concerned with the polished image of candidates, but rather with the hard issues facing this country. They are concerned about jobs. They are concerned about the cost of health. They are concerned about housing, education, crime, and they are concerned about the cost of government and the price of groceries.
THE PRESIDENT. I did recommend to the Congress early this year a rather comprehensive approach to crime control, a new proposal that would make it much more difficult for individuals to get what we call Saturday night specials, which are the cheap handguns that are used extensively for illegal purposes.
In addition, I proposed to the Congress that we have much more severe penalties for a person using a gun in the commission of some other crime and for mandatory sentences in order to get people who use guns in the process of committing a crime or alleged crime.
Now, I have also recommended to the Congress some legislation that would provide mandatory prison sentences for people who use guns in the carrying out of violent crime. I wish the Congress would pass that legislation. I wish State legislatures would do the same in those cases where they don't have such legislation. We have to prosecute, convict, and put in jail those people who illegally use guns. And if we do, I think we can have a substantial impact on the bad use of firearms.
My recommendations on how to control violent crime were submitted to the Congress last June with strong emphasis on protecting the innocent victims of crime. To keep a convicted criminal from committing more crimes, we must put him in prison so he cannot harm more law-abiding citizens. To be effective, this punishment must be swift and it must be certain.
To speed Federal justice, I propose an increase this year in the United States attorneys prosecuting Federal crimes and the reinforcement of the number of United States marshals. Additional Federal judges are needed, as recommended by me and the Judicial Conference.
Another major threat to every American's person and property is the criminal carrying a handgun. The way to cut down on the criminal use of guns is not to take guns away from the law-abiding citizen, but to impose mandatory sentences for crimes in which a gun is used, make it harder to obtain cheap guns for criminal purposes, and concentrate gun control enforcement in highcrime areas.
My budget recommends 500 additional Federal agents in the 11 largest metropolitan high-crime areas to help local authorities stop criminals from selling and using handguns.
I recommended months ago that the Congress enact mandatory fixed sentences for persons convicted of Federal crimes involving the sale of hard drugs. Hard drugs, we all know, degrade the spirit as they destroy the body of their users.
It is unrealistic and misleading to hold out the hope that the Federal Government can move into every neighborhood and clean up crime. Under the Constitution, the greatest responsibility for curbing crime lies with State and local authorities. They are the frontline fighters in the war against crime.
As President, I pledge the strict enforcement of Federal laws and--by example, support, and leadership--to help State and local authorities enforce their laws. Together, we must protect the victims of crime and ensure domestic tranquility.
Number one, I think we should stiffen the penalties for those individuals who commit a crime while in the possession of a handgun. This includes, for those type of crimes, mandatory criminal prison sentences.
In addition, in the budget for fiscal 1977, I recommended an additional 500 employees for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division [Bureau] of the Department of the Treasury, so that they can move into major metropolitan areas of high crime and incidents and really go after the trading of handguns in those areas where the danger is the greatest. I am categorically opposed to the registration of guns and/or the individuals who own handguns.
We realize today that passivity and permissiveness invite crime and that the certainty of punishment prevents crime, and I mean positive, swift, and just punishment. But the criminal justice system need not be vindictive to be effective.
A legal system that is exploited by the criminal but ignores his victim is sadly out of balance. I ask your help and that of all Americans in restoring that balance. I applaud the Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime that is emerging in Florida. The 10,000 volunteers now active in the citizen's crime watch of the Dade County Public Safety Department deserve particular commendation, and I am glad with the many others who have passed that on to those public-spirited citizens.
As you know, these crimewatchers have provided information leading to significant arrests, including the seizure, as I understand it, of some 23 tons of illegal drugs.
The responsibility of local officials in dealing with the alarming increase in violent crime is primarily under our Constitution. Yet crime is so pervasive that it can be brought under control only by the concerted efforts of all levels of government--Federal, State, and local, by the closest possible cooperation among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and by nonpartisan political unity against a common enemy.
We recall in this Bicentennial Year that our Founding Fathers adhered to the dictum of John Locke: Where there is no law, there is no freedom. The overwhelming majority of Americans are law-abiding citizens. It is a small, hard core of lawbreakers who commit a very large proportion of all crimes.
A recent study in one major metropolitan area recently showed that within one single year more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were committed by only 10 individuals. Most serious crimes are committed by repeaters. Such criminals duly tried and convicted must be removed from our society for a definite period of time. The law-abiding majority also has its rights and, as Chief Executive, I intend to see that those rights are given full weight on the scales of justice in America.
With very few exceptions, I strongly advocate mandatory minimum sentences for individuals who commit Federal crimes or offenses involving the use of a dangerous weapon or who commit such grave offenses as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and dealing in hard drugs, and for repeat offenders who commit Federal crimes that harm or endanger others. Too many violent and habitual criminals are convicted but never spend a single day in prison. The lack of certainty tempts the mugger and, yes, even the murderer. We must shorten their odds if we are to deter lawbreakers.
The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is not to disarm law-abiding citizens. The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is to impose mandatory sentences for gun crimes, to make it harder to obtain "Saturday night specials," and to concentrate our gun control in high crime areas.
The vast, vast majority of victims of violent crime in Florida and throughout the United States are the poor, the old, the children--the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
While prisons exist to protect society from the criminal, those convicted are on the main line back to crime if they are freed because of inadequate detention facilities. This is also true if inmates are confined in notoriously bad or overcrowded facilities that breed even more crime.
Unbelievably, America still has the same prison capacity as in 1960, although crime has doubled and our population has burgeoned. The need for more prisons is obvious and very, very urgent, and I included it in the budget for the next fiscal year four new Federal prisons that are badly needed to meet this problem at the Federal level.
Why are so many serious and violent crimes never reported to the police? The criminal victimization survey conducted by the Bureau of Census for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, better known as LEAA, disclosed that in 13 major cities, including Miami, only about one-third of rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults, and burglaries are reported to the police. Miami has a higher rate of reporting. than most of the cities that were surveyed.
But even here the figures show that 4 out of 10 rape cases are not reported. In the case of robbery accompanied by serious assault resulting in injury, 3 out of every 10 victims do not report the crime to police.
Crime figures, unfortunately, do not tell the full and the very terrible story. The fact that so many victims are reluctant to report serious crimes indicates a breakdown in the traditional relationship between the citizen and the police.
We must protect the victims of crime as well as the witnesses to crime. We must help them and we must treat them with great respect. That is essential.
This has been advanced by the National District Attorneys Association and a victim's rights card is now used in 18 States. The investigating officer informs the victim, "You have the right, as a victim of crime, the following: 'To be free from intimidation; to be told about available compensation for court appearances; to be told about available compensation for your injuries; to be told about social service agencies which can help you; and to be assisted by your criminal justice agencies.'"
The violent crime that plagues Americans is essentially within the realm of State and local government. But the Federal Government will assert its maximum role under the Constitution to fight crime within its jurisdiction.
The increasing abuse of hard drugs contributes to the soaring crime rate. In this case, our Federal responsibility is very, very clear. I have directed all Federal law enforcement agencies--in particular, the Drug Enforcement Administration-to intensify the drive against major narcotic traffickers. I am seeking legislation and cooperation with the Congress for mandatory prison sentences for convicted traffickers in hard drugs. These merchants of death deserve nothing less.
I have also recommended to the Congress to increase Federal funds to get drug addicts into treatment and out of crime. Your own program right here in Miami, known as the Treatment Alternative to Street Crime, funded by LEAA, I think is an excellent example of this concept at work.
The programs that I have outlined here tonight are part of a Federal effort to combat crime. As long as crime is a national or nationwide problem, the administration is determined to provide leadership and assistance in fighting it within our jurisdiction.
The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration is vital in this comprehensive national effort. Since 1969, the LEAA has given more than $153 million in Federal funds to the State of Florida to fight crime. I have asked that Congress extend the existing law. I repeat those requests today and call upon Congress to act rapidly so there is no indecision as to our total effort by the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branch to move forward.
I continue to urge the Congress to enact legislation to compensate victims of Federal crimes who suffer personal injuries. This is somewhat controversial, but I have been convinced, after looking at all of the evidence, that it is a step forward. And I hope that the Congress will respond. The money would come from a fund consisting of fines paid by convicted Federal offenders, promoting the concept of restitution under criminal law.
And I would appreciate the chance to meet with so many of you, as I have tonight, who follow the profession of the law, who know the problems, and who know from a practical experience what can and what ought to be done in the process of defeating crime.
Our concern should be for the victim of crime. Our concern should be for domestic tranquillity. Yes, we understand the problems of the law violator, but here in Florida you can take the lead, as you have in many cases, to be on the side of the victim and for domestic tranquillity. I hope and trust that we, on a national level, can take the same strong stand, which is essential for the benefit of all law-abiding citizens in our country.
And, as I close, I pledge to you and to all the people of Florida my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime here as well as elsewhere in full cooperation, in consultation with experts such as you, as we try to meet head on this very serious problem.
Thank you. Good night.
THE PRESIDENT. I have long been an adamant opponent of the registration of guns or the registration of gunowners, period. Let me add, if I might, one or two sentences to that. I believe that we should pass legislation to make mandatory certain penalties for those individuals who commit a crime in the possession of a gun, period. And I also happen to believe that we should, in those areas of heavy crime, where we know, from the records that the so-called "Saturday Night Specials," the cheap handguns, are used in great numbers to commit a crime, to commit murder, then we ought to beef up the law enforcement people in those areas to try and stop that kind of attack against our society.
THE PRESIDENT. Last year, I submitted to the Congress a comprehensive anticrime bill which included a number of provisions aimed at controlling the illegal use of guns, and let me cite you what they were:
Number one, I proposed to the Congress that we make it a mandatory certain penalty for anybody who commits a crime while in the possession of a firearm. In addition, I suggested to the Congress that we tighten up the control of these cheap handguns called Saturday Night Specials. A few years ago the Congress passed legislation to prohibit the importation of Saturday Night Specials from overseas. But the people who make them overseas, what they did to evade the law was to send the parts to the United States, and they have been assembled in our country.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Maynard, the record of gun control, whether it's in one city or another or in some States does not show that the registration of a gun, handgun, or the registration of the gun owner has in any way whatsoever decreased the crime rate or the use of that gun in the committing of a crime. The record just doesn't prove that such legislation or action by a local city council is effective.
What we have to do--and this is the crux of the matter--is to make it very, very difficult for a person who uses a gun in the commission of a crime to stay out of jail. If we make the use of a gun in the commission of a crime a serious criminal offense and that person is prosecuted, then in my opinion we are going after the person who uses the gun for the wrong reason. I don't believe in the registration of handguns or the registration of the handgun owner. That has not proven to be effective. And, therefore, I think the better way is to go after the criminal, the individual who commits a crime in the possession of a gun and uses that gun for a part of his criminal activity.
Those are the people who ought to be in jail. And the only way to do it is to pass strong legislation so that once apprehended, indicted, convicted, they will be in jail and off the streets and not using guns in the commission of a crime.
MR. MAYNARD. But, Mr. President, don't you think that the proliferation of the availability of handguns contributes to the possibility of those crimes being committed? And there is a second part to my follow-up. Very quickly, there are, as you know and as you've said, jurisdictions around the country with strong gun control laws. The police officials in those cities contend that if there were a national law to prevent other jurisdictions from providing the weapons that then come into places like New York, that they might have a better handle on the problem. Have you considered that in your analysis of the handgun proliferation problem?
I have been a hunter all my life and happen to own both shotguns, rifles, and a handgun. And the only purpose that I would see in registering handguns and not long guns of any kind would be to prohibit the ownership of those guns by those who have used them in the commission of a crime or who have been proven to be mentally incompetent to own a gun. I believe that limited approach to the question would be advisable, and I think adequate, but that's as far as I would go with it.
I believe, however, a comment ought to be made about the direction of the Burger Court vis-a-vis the Court that preceded it. It seems to me that the Miranda case was a case that really made it very, very difficult for the police, the law enforcement people in this country, to do what they could to make certain that the victim of a crime was protected and that those that commit crimes were properly handled and sent to jail. The Miranda case, the Burger Court is gradually changing. And I am pleased to see that there are some steps being made by the Burger Court to modify the so-called Miranda decision.
The pardon power entrusted to the President under the Constitution of the United States has a long history and rests on precedents going back centuries before our Constitution was drafted and adopted. The power has been used sometimes as Alexander Hamilton saw its purpose: "In seasons of insurrection... when a well-timed offer of pardon to the insurgents or rebels may restore the tranquillity of the commonwealth; and which, if suffered to pass unimproved, it may never be possible afterwards to recall."1 Other times it has been applied to one person as "an act of grace... which exempts the individual, on whom it is bestowed, from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has committed."2 When a pardon is granted, it also represents "the determination of the ultimate authority that the public welfare will be better served by inflicting less than what the judgment fixed."3 However, the Constitution does not limit the pardon power to cases of convicted offenders or even indicted offenders.4 Thus, I am firm in my conviction that as President I did have the authority to proclaim a pardon for the former President when I did.
I think, from the mail I have received from all over the country, as well as my own district, I know that the people want to understand how you can explain having pardoned Richard Nixon without specifying any of the crimes for which he was pardoned. And how can you explain pardoning Richard Nixon without obtaining any acknowledgement of guilt from him? How do you explain the failure to consult the Attorney General of the United States with respect to the issuance of the pardon, even though in your confirmation hearings you had indicated the Attorney General's opinion would be critical in any decision to pardon the former President?
Frankly, I am concerned at some of the questioning by my colleagues, asking questions, if all men are not equal under the law, because certainly, being the outstanding lawyers that they are, they know that the pardoning power itself is inherently inequitable, but for a larger purpose, it grants to the Chief Executive of the Federal Government or the State, in the case of State crimes, to pardon individuals who may or have been indicted or convicted of crimes.
The FBI has the responsibility to check on individuals who are charged with a crime--any American citizen, including a Member of Congress. The FBI, if they are seeking to employ somebody or if somebody applies for a job, the FBI has an obligation to check on that person's record. And some Members of. Congress at the present time served in the FBI at various times prior to being elected to the House or to the Senate. So, the FBI ought to have files on those people.
THE PRESIDENT. I hadn't heard that, John, but I think that is kind of silly.
MR. CHANCELLOR. You mentioned the charter of the CIA and you mentioned the responsibility of the United States Government to engage in a certain amount of looking at and investigating citizens who are not necessarily charged with a crime, as in job applications and in other things. Do you suppose that we could work out a better way of sharing this responsibility in the American Government? Could that come out of these FBI and CIA investigations?
And my question is whether you think it would be fair for the Democrats to charge that this Administration is soft on crime, or at least is incapable of dealing with the problem.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, unfortunately for the country, the crime rate has been increasing for the last 10 or 15 years, whether it was under a Democratic administration, under President Kennedy or President Johnson or, except for, I think, 1 year under the former President, the crime rate has been going up.
We have a lot of problems that have to be solved in this country. Louis Wyman understands some of those problems better than anybody that I know in Washington, as his record of attorney general speaks for itself. We have too much crime in America. Louis Wyman knows, as attorney general and as a Member of the Congress, how to effectively meet the challenge of crime in America.
THE PRESIDENT. I set that forth in a crime message to the Congress where I said, "Our concern today ought to be for the victims of crime." The crime message that I sent to the Congress calls for mandatory sentences for those that participate in a crime of violence using a gun, and we have urged the courts to increase their confinement of convicted criminals.
Too many criminals today, after they have been convicted, are put off on probation. There ought to be a penalty for the committing of a crime, and that means confinement. Whether it is 6 months or some other term, I believe mandatory sentences are required in certain crimes.
I believe the courts have to be firmer, and I think they--you know, it is unbelievable, but a very, very high percentage of crime today is done by a very limited number of people, professional criminals, and they ought to be behind the bars.
Now, I have also recommended to the Congress some legislation that would provide mandatory prison sentences for people who use guns in the carrying out of violent crime. I wish the Congress would pass that legislation. I wish State legislatures would do the same in those cases where they don't have such legislation. We have to prosecute, convict, and put in jail those people who illegally use guns. And if we do, I think we can have a substantial impact on the bad use of firearms.
Number one, I think we should stiffen the penalties for those individuals who commit a crime while in the possession of a handgun. This includes, for those type of crimes, mandatory criminal prison sentences.
In addition, in the budget for fiscal 1977, I recommended an additional 500 employees for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division [Bureau] of the Department of the Treasury, so that they can move into major metropolitan areas of high crime and incidents and really go after the trading of handguns in those areas where the danger is the greatest. I am categorically opposed to the registration of guns and/or the individuals who own handguns.
This money has gone directly, with a minimum of redtape, to your State government, to your county and city governments. That money has helped to hold down local and State taxes. It has helped to fight crime. It has helped to educate children.
We realize today that passivity and permissiveness invite crime and that the certainty of punishment prevents crime, and I mean positive, swift, and just punishment. But the criminal justice system need not be vindictive to be effective.
A legal system that is exploited by the criminal but ignores his victim is sadly out of balance. I ask your help and that of all Americans in restoring that balance. I applaud the Federal, State, and local citizen coalition against crime that is emerging in Florida. The 10,000 volunteers now active in the citizen's crime watch of the Dade County Public Safety Department deserve particular commendation, and I am glad with the many others who have passed that on to those public-spirited citizens.
As you know, these crimewatchers have provided information leading to significant arrests, including the seizure, as I understand it, of some 23 tons of illegal drugs.
The responsibility of local officials in dealing with the alarming increase in violent crime is primarily under our Constitution. Yet crime is so pervasive that it can be brought under control only by the concerted efforts of all levels of government--Federal, State, and local, by the closest possible cooperation among the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and by nonpartisan political unity against a common enemy.
We recall in this Bicentennial Year that our Founding Fathers adhered to the dictum of John Locke: Where there is no law, there is no freedom. The overwhelming majority of Americans are law-abiding citizens. It is a small, hard core of lawbreakers who commit a very large proportion of all crimes.
A recent study in one major metropolitan area recently showed that within one single year more than 200 burglaries, 60 rapes, and 14 murders were committed by only 10 individuals. Most serious crimes are committed by repeaters. Such criminals duly tried and convicted must be removed from our society for a definite period of time. The law-abiding majority also has its rights and, as Chief Executive, I intend to see that those rights are given full weight on the scales of justice in America.
With very few exceptions, I strongly advocate mandatory minimum sentences for individuals who commit Federal crimes or offenses involving the use of a dangerous weapon or who commit such grave offenses as aircraft hijacking, kidnaping, and dealing in hard drugs, and for repeat offenders who commit Federal crimes that harm or endanger others. Too many violent and habitual criminals are convicted but never spend a single day in prison. The lack of certainty tempts the mugger and, yes, even the murderer. We must shorten their odds if we are to deter lawbreakers.
The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is not to disarm law-abiding citizens. The way to reduce criminal use of handguns is to impose mandatory sentences for gun crimes, to make it harder to obtain "Saturday night specials," and to concentrate our gun control in high crime areas.
The vast, vast majority of victims of violent crime in Florida and throughout the United States are the poor, the old, the children--the most defenseless of our fellow citizens.
While prisons exist to protect society from the criminal, those convicted are on the main line back to crime if they are freed because of inadequate detention facilities. This is also true if inmates are confined in notoriously bad or overcrowded facilities that breed even more crime.
Unbelievably, America still has the same prison capacity as in 1960, although crime has doubled and our population has burgeoned. The need for more prisons is obvious and very, very urgent, and I included it in the budget for the next fiscal year four new Federal prisons that are badly needed to meet this problem at the Federal level.
Why are so many serious and violent crimes never reported to the police? The criminal victimization survey conducted by the Bureau of Census for the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration, better known as LEAA, disclosed that in 13 major cities, including Miami, only about one-third of rapes, robberies, aggravated assaults, and burglaries are reported to the police. Miami has a higher rate of reporting. than most of the cities that were surveyed.
But even here the figures show that 4 out of 10 rape cases are not reported. In the case of robbery accompanied by serious assault resulting in injury, 3 out of every 10 victims do not report the crime to police.
Crime figures, unfortunately, do not tell the full and the very terrible story. The fact that so many victims are reluctant to report serious crimes indicates a breakdown in the traditional relationship between the citizen and the police.
We must protect the victims of crime as well as the witnesses to crime. We must help them and we must treat them with great respect. That is essential.
This has been advanced by the National District Attorneys Association and a victim's rights card is now used in 18 States. The investigating officer informs the victim, "You have the right, as a victim of crime, the following: 'To be free from intimidation; to be told about available compensation for court appearances; to be told about available compensation for your injuries; to be told about social service agencies which can help you; and to be assisted by your criminal justice agencies.'"
The violent crime that plagues Americans is essentially within the realm of State and local government. But the Federal Government will assert its maximum role under the Constitution to fight crime within its jurisdiction.
The increasing abuse of hard drugs contributes to the soaring crime rate. In this case, our Federal responsibility is very, very clear. I have directed all Federal law enforcement agencies--in particular, the Drug Enforcement Administration-to intensify the drive against major narcotic traffickers. I am seeking legislation and cooperation with the Congress for mandatory prison sentences for convicted traffickers in hard drugs. These merchants of death deserve nothing less.
I have also recommended to the Congress to increase Federal funds to get drug addicts into treatment and out of crime. Your own program right here in Miami, known as the Treatment Alternative to Street Crime, funded by LEAA, I think is an excellent example of this concept at work.
The programs that I have outlined here tonight are part of a Federal effort to combat crime. As long as crime is a national or nationwide problem, the administration is determined to provide leadership and assistance in fighting it within our jurisdiction.
The Law Enforcement Assistance Administration is vital in this comprehensive national effort. Since 1969, the LEAA has given more than $153 million in Federal funds to the State of Florida to fight crime. I have asked that Congress extend the existing law. I repeat those requests today and call upon Congress to act rapidly so there is no indecision as to our total effort by the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branch to move forward.
I continue to urge the Congress to enact legislation to compensate victims of Federal crimes who suffer personal injuries. This is somewhat controversial, but I have been convinced, after looking at all of the evidence, that it is a step forward. And I hope that the Congress will respond. The money would come from a fund consisting of fines paid by convicted Federal offenders, promoting the concept of restitution under criminal law.
And I would appreciate the chance to meet with so many of you, as I have tonight, who follow the profession of the law, who know the problems, and who know from a practical experience what can and what ought to be done in the process of defeating crime.
Our concern should be for the victim of crime. Our concern should be for domestic tranquillity. Yes, we understand the problems of the law violator, but here in Florida you can take the lead, as you have in many cases, to be on the side of the victim and for domestic tranquillity. I hope and trust that we, on a national level, can take the same strong stand, which is essential for the benefit of all law-abiding citizens in our country.
And, as I close, I pledge to you and to all the people of Florida my unrelenting efforts to reduce crime here as well as elsewhere in full cooperation, in consultation with experts such as you, as we try to meet head on this very serious problem.
Thank you. Good night.
Third, tomorrow, I will send to the Congress special legislation to safeguard critical intelligence secrets. This legislation would make it a crime for a Government employee who has access to certain highly classified information to reveal that information improperly.
THE PRESIDENT. I do not believe in the decriminalization of marijuana, period. There are many studies that are going on, but I have seen insufficient evidence to change the existing laws which make the sale or use or possession of marijuana a crime.
