The first is, how can we help to create an economic climate so that you can use your education in a rewarding job?
Secondly, how can we keep the peace so that you can stay on the job? The most important function of your education is to equip you for a satisfying job so that you can enjoy what life has to offer to you in the future.
Our prime responsibility is to provide the finest medical care for those who were injured in wartime, and we have 170 or 180 USVA hospitals, and we have substantially increased the medical and nursing care personnel so that we give quality care to those veterans who are in these hospitals. Number two, there is not going to be any elimination of the GI educational benefits for those veterans who have served in wartime.
Let me make one alternative comment. The GI bill was passed during World War II for those 16 million Americans who served so when they got out they could get an education. It expired after World War II. Korea came along, again combat, and it was reenacted.
Now the question is whether in peacetime you should continue giving educational benefits to those who serve under an all-volunteer system?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me raise a question. We want an all-volunteer service, and we have got it. There is no more draft. I am all for it. But if you give educational benefits to an all-volunteer force, and you want them to stay in so we have career personnel, and at the same time, you give them educational benefits so that is an incentive for them to get out, it doesn't make much sense from the point of view of the Government.
Now, I think we can solve it, and this is the way it ought to be solved. If a young man volunteers, he has a high school education, we ought to give him educational opportunities in the service so that he can go to school, get his college degree so the service will have him with a higher education, rather than having him get out to get an education. That is the better way to solve it.
THE PRESIDENT. Secretary Simon has talked to me in generalities about a Federal income simplification program. The objective would be to lower income tax rates, but it would take away all or most of the exemptions that are currently in our existing Internal Revenue Code, such as the deduction for contributions to educational institutions, deductions to charitable organizations, and a wide range of other deductions, such as those to the United Fund, to the Red Cross, to the rest. That would be the thrust of the proposal made by Secretary Simon. We had a good discussion about it.
I would like to know what your views are on the role of the Federal Government in the partnership with State and local governments in the general funding of education, what proportionate share you see the Federal Government bears when such a partnership develops, and how you see the Federal Government going from categorical aids to general aids, and how you see the role of the President in producing such movement?
THE PRESIDENT. You have opened one of my favorite subjects. At the present time the Federal Government has roughly 27 categorical grant programs for primary, secondary, vocational, and education for the disabled--twenty-Seven of them, as I recollect. Each one has their own bureaucracy. In each case separate forms have to be filled out. It is an endless, discouraging process, I suspect. Every educator that I talk to tells me that.
Now, the Federal Government in the last fiscal year or in the current fiscal year is contributing roughly $3,100 million in all of these programs. In my judgment, the best way for Uncle Sam to make an investment in primary and secondary and other educational areas is to junk all those categorical grant programs and to put them all in a block grant program, add a sweetener to get the support, and that is what I did.
THE PRESIDENT. There have been, unfortunately, instances of dishonesty in government at the local and State and in the Federal level. But I do have to say this--and I have had a great deal of experience with Federal as Well as State and local individuals--I think people in government do as well in that area as people in other professions or in other areas. We have a few in business and labor and education and others that don't meet those standards, either.
From the material point of view, we want a prosperous, healthy economy so that people have an opportunity to be gainfully employed, to work and to enjoy themselves. And we want a country that is strong enough to protect freedom here and to work with those who want freedom elsewhere. But the long-range goal of this country ought to be--this is the vision or the dream that I think we ought to have for you and those your age--we want freedom, freedom from mass government, freedom from mass education, freedom from mass industry and mass labor.
Number two, I think there has to be a basic intelligence that is related to your education, whether it was in school or whether it was in the business world or whether it was in your profession. You have to have not only an educational background but an experienced background. Experience is vitally important as one sees day after day the kind of problems that come across the President's desk.
You can't sit back and say this is wrong, it is terrible, or that is wrong, and I can't do anything about it. You have to look at the problem through experience, through education, through good judgment, through honesty. You have to come forth with some solutions, not just be critical. And those are the kinds of ingredients that I think are essential and vital for any President, whether it is President in 1976 or whether it is in the future or whether it has been the case in the past.
But I can say this: I'm doing the best I can to get away from that. And during the next 10 days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running television advertisements or newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford's character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford's campaign. And I hope that we can leave those issues, in the next 10 days, about personalities and mistakes of the past--we've both matte some mistakes--and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people.
Now we have a very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization-I'd say several hundred of them, and they are very fine and very highly qualified.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
Also, I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments and also to remove the prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money, so that it can be used to improve education and health care. We have now, for instance, only 7 percent of the total education costs being financed by the Federal Government. When the Nixon-Ford administration started, this was 10 percent. That's a 30-percent reduction in the portion that the Federal Government contributes to education in just 8 years and, as you know, the education costs have gone up tremendously.
The Department of HUD is enforcing the new legislation that takes care of redlining. What we are doing is saying that there are opportunities--business opportunities, educational opportunities, responsibilities--where people with talent--blacks or any other minority--can fully qualify.
We've got a 30-percent or 40-percent unemployment rate among minority young people. And there has been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language. And that's where there has been a great generation of despair and ill-health and lack of education and lack of purposefulness and a lack of hope for the future.
MR. CARTER. I would not work hard to support any of those. We have always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed but the passage of them has been fairly slow and few and far between. In the 200-year history, there has been a very cautious approach to this. Quite often we have a transient problem. I am strongly against abortion. I think abortion is wrong. I don't think the Government ought to do anything to encourage abortion, but I don't favor a constitutional amendment on the subject. But short of a constitutional amendment, and within the confines of a Supreme Court ruling, I will do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures. I personally don't believe that the Federal Government ought to finance abortions, but I draw the line and don't support a constitutional amendment. However, I honor the right of people to seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on prayer in the schools, and on abortion, but among those you named, I won't actively work for the passage of any of them.
Employment ought to be restored to our people. We have become almost a welfare state. We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did 8 years ago when the Republicans took over the White House. Our people want to go back to work. Our education system can be improved. Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government, and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained. Our housing programs have gone bad. It used to be that the average family could own a house, but now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes.
Last week, the Congress passed the elementary and secondary education bill, and I found it on my desk. Any reservations I might have about some of its provisions--and I do have--fade in comparison to the urgent needs of America for quality education. I will sign it in a few days.

Then you have Frank Southworth.2 I know Frank. I know the problems, some of the difficult areas of the city of Denver. He has got range and depth and experience. He served on the school board and has been a leader in trying to give quality education to the people and to the students of Denver. I congratulate him and urge his full and total support.
Although we might expect the certainty of a prison sentence to serve as a deterrent, let us remember that one obvious effect of prison is to separate lawbreakers from the law-abiding society. In totalitarian states it's easier to assure law and order. Dictators eliminate freedom of movement, of speech, and of choice. They control the news media and the educational system. They conscript the entire society and deprive people of basic civil liberties. By such methods, crime can be strictly controlled. But in effect, the entire society becomes one huge prison. This is not a choice we are willing to consider.
The dignity of the individual is based ultimately on a sense of pride. It does not come from government programs that take over the individual's life and reduce the person to a case file and a claim number. Real aid to the individual is aid that helps the individual to help himself or herself. Federal assistance that helps people achieve higher education and higher qualification is fully justified, because that is the aim and that is the objective.
I am told that one of your graduates here today receiving a degree in education is a 45-year-old woman who worked as a teacher's aide. She aspired to teach. With nine children--one severely handicapped--it was obviously not easy. But her perseverance is typical of this entire graduating class. So is the spirit of your Vietnam veterans and others who caught up to win degrees today.
The Federal Government can provide financial aid to education, but it cannot give individuals the determination that you have displayed in earning your degrees.
But I am concerned about the future of some other young Americans who are today neither in school nor working at jobs. Tragically, they are on the streets. Some have lost hope and motivation to the extent that they no longer are even looking for work or education. Some, tragically, have police records.
So, I challenge today's graduates to use your new skills to help the people who are not in this hall today. You are uniquely equipped. I challenge the graduates in education to teach young people how to read and how to write. I challenge the graduates in the liberal arts to stimulate the mind and to inspire the spirit. I challenge the graduates in corrections and law enforcement to counsel and to motivate individuals from the path or paths of destruction of themselves and others. I challenge the business and administration graduates to conceive of new jobs that are more interesting, challenging, and rewarding. I challenge all graduates to set an example that gives hope to the millions who have not yet made it.
I agree with the CSU philosophy. You kill pride if students are passed merely because they come from disadvantaged backgrounds. That is no favor. It is a disservice. You sacrifice for an education, and consequently, you are entitled to a fair chance to learn. CSU is not a school where the student can coast blithefully through for 4 years and emerge with a degree but without competence.
The judiciary is the Nation's standing army in defense of individual freedom, but all segments of our society--government, business, labor, and education-must work to see that the individual is not stifled.
Now in the third, the challenge, as I see it, is to advance individual independence. If we don't do something in this third century to protect the individual against mass education, mass government, mass labor, where the rights of the individual are lost because of the totality of the effort--the individual has to be given his unique opportunity to participate and not get lost in the crowd.
This wonderful independent voter wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family at prices he can afford, and so do we as Republicans.
Since California is almost a model of the whole United States--in its diversity of industry and agriculture, its urban and rural interests, its internal and international trade and commerce, its steady growth and the attendant challenges in transportation, education, employment, and human needs--almost any national problem would be an appropriate one to discuss in California context. Any subject that is of major importance to Californians is also of deep concern to all Americans.
We believe that the freedom of the individual is important, that each of you should not be overcrowded by the Federal Government of certain rights, whether they are in education, in industry, in your community. The right of each of you as an individual is a sacred trust to us.
The black church saw the need to concentrate early on education. Let me add that the issue in 1837, when Cheyney State College was founded in Pennsylvania as the first black institution of higher learning, was quality education. The need today is still quality education. I assure you here today that I stand for quality education for every American. Not one single child in this country is excluded. With reason, with calm, with sincerity and some prayers from all of us, we will master these trials and tribulations and become a greater nation because of them.
THE PRESIDENT. I am glad that you put the emphasis where I think it belongs--namely, quality education. Quality education under the method utilized by the courts is aimed at forced school busing. That, of course, came out of the 1954 Supreme Court decision.
I firmly say without any hesitation or qualification that if the court says something has to be done, it will be done, as far as this Administration is concerned. No question about that. On the other hand, it is my judgment that there is a better way of achieving quality education for all schoolchildren than by the court method.
It is most interesting. A very able black newspaper columnist by the name of William Raspberry, in the Washington Post this morning, said that courtordered, forced busing was not achieving quality education. I wholeheartedly agree with him.
Now, what can be a better way to do it? I believe that you can improve the facilities in many of the disadvantaged areas. Too often school boards have neglected some of the plant and equipment in those areas. We should increase the pupil-teacher ratio. I think that would be helpful in upgrading the educational opportunities of young people so they can achieve a quality education.
I believe that the emergency school aid program which Congress approved roughly 5 or 6 years ago--it is about a billion and a half a year; no, it is not quite that much but it is a sizable amount--can be focused in on places like Boston, as Secretary Mathews has done, or in Louisville, where we are having our current problems, to try and get better faculty, better facilities, better equipment. In my honest opinion, that is a preferable way to achieve the objective of quality education without tearing apart some of the social fabric in some of these communities.
THE PRESIDENT. We have a number of higher education programs. The GI bill that was originated after World War II is in full operation now and is continuing even though those who are in the military today are not in combat. And that was the general basis upon which the GI bill was initially passed at the time of World War II and at the time of Korea. We spend roughly $1 billion to $1.5 billion a year on that program at the present time.
In addition, we have a number of educational programs that are aimed at helping young people who want to go to college and do not have the financial means to do so. We have a loan guarantee program with any loaning institution. We have Basic Educational Opportunities--it's BEOG, or whatever the combination is. And there is another one--I can't recall the name--but the total amount available in these several programs is about a billion dollars a year. So, there is really no reason today why no young person who wants to go to college can't get Federal financial assistance of a substantial amount. It won't cover the whole thing, but it will cover a very substantial amount.
THE PRESIDENT. It is my best recollection that in the traditional vocational education program there has been a gradual increase. If my memory is accurate, it is about $300 million a year. Is that roughly right? Well, I can tell you that it has been on an increasing scale, and I think that figure is roughly right.
Now, in addition to the traditional vocational education programs, we have what is called CETA--Comprehensive Educational Training Act, CETA--and it has been funded this year at a figure of $3,200 million. Included in that program was $450 million for the summer job training program for young people, which was very helpful. It had some aspects of vocational education.
The remainder of the CETA program is aimed at vocational training primarily for those people who are out of work of one occupation and seeking employment in another occupation. So, roughly $2 1/2 billion is available in that aspect of the program plus the traditional high school and vocational education program.
Now, that is a lot of money--I think it has generally done a good job. But what has bothered me about some of the vocational educational programs and some of the CETA training programs is that we have a training program that doesn't necessarily relate to an occupational area where there are job opportunities.
I know from my old experience in the Congress that we used to establish-not we, but the department--job training programs, and then all of a sudden when the program ended there were no. job opportunities in that particular employment field. I think there has to be a better coordination in finding out where the job opportunities are, the shortages exist, and then train people for those shortages rather than just train them for an occupation where there are no job opportunities. I think we can do a better job spending that much money in this aspect of vocational education.
Take the education bill that I vetoed. This last week the Congress overrode it 300-and-something to 30 or 40 in the House, and in the Senate it was 70-something to 12. That single education bill will add $350 million to spending in this year and $800 million next year over and above what I recommended, and I recommended more for this year than was made available last year.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe our theme for the Bicentennial should be the rights of the individual operating within the law. I think the individual in the third century of our country should be free of mass education, mass industry, mass government. I think the right of the individual operating within the law without the heavy hand of government or any of the other massive organizations running him, if we can achieve that, I think it will accomplish what you are seeking to accomplish.
We have increased our funding, for example, in a wide spectrum--education, unemployment compensation, the whole area of human assistance. We have recommended in the budget for the current fiscal year more money than any administration in the history of the United States for social programs.
They allege that this is the way that the courts ought to achieve quality education. I strongly, vehemently disagree with the Court's decision, based on the Constitution, as the best way to achieve quality education. I have had that view for 10 years or more.
Now, until the courts decide that there is a better way to achieve quality education under their interpretation of the Constitution, there is nothing that a President can do, there is nothing that the Congress can do, except what the Congress did a year ago under the leadership of Congressman Marv Esch, who introduced an amendment in the House of Representatives, which was passed and approved in both the House and the Senate, which listed seven or eight steps to achieve the constitutional handling of how to achieve quality education, and the last of that criteria was busing.
Unfortunately, few courts, few Federal courts, have followed the guidelines of the Esch amendment. I wish they would. But until the Court either uses that criteria or changes their way in which they want to constitutionally achieve quality education, there is nothing a President can do, and not much more that a Member of the House or Senate can do.
THE PRESIDENT. Really, I have spoken out consistently and for some time on this problem. I was one of the original Members of the House or the Senate that said that court-ordered forced busing to achieve racial balance was not the way to accomplish quality education.
That has been a consistent statement, view, policy of mine for a number of years. I believe it even more fervently today than I did before. So, we have to start out with the assumption that education, quality education, is what we are all seeking to accomplish.
Dr. Coleman,3 who testified before the Senate Committee on Judiciary just a few days ago--he had some thoughts on it. And it is interesting that Dr. Coleman, who was an initial proponent on busing to achieve quality education, has now--after studying the problem in a number of cities--come to the conclusion that it is not the answer.
As you recall, the year 1975 opened with rancor and with bitterness. Political misdeeds of the past had neither been forgotten nor forgiven. The longest, most divisive war in our history was winding toward an unhappy conclusion. Many feared that the end of that foreign war of men and machines meant the beginning of a domestic war of recrimination and reprisal. Friends and adversaries abroad were asking whether America had lost its nerve. Finally, our economy was ravaged by inflation--inflation that was plunging us into the worse recession in four decades. At the same time, Americans became increasingly alienated from big institutions. They were steadily losing confidence, not just in big government but in big business, big labor, and big education, among others. Ours was a troubled land.
Including my health care program reforms, I propose to consolidate some 59 separate Federal programs and provide flexible Federal dollar grants to help States, cities, and local agencies in such important areas as education, child nutrition, and social services. This flexible system will do the job better and do it closer to home.
The American people in 1976 are not concerned with the polished image of candidates, but rather with the hard issues facing this country. They are concerned about jobs. They are concerned about the cost of health. They are concerned about housing, education, crime, and they are concerned about the cost of government and the price of groceries.
I believe, and believe most deeply, that revenue sharing is far, far more important and effective legislation. Over the last 4 years, 22 percent of general revenue sharing funds from the Federal Government to your States and to your local communities have been spent on education. Twenty-four percent has been spent to improve local law enforcement and public safety programs. Fourteen percent was spent for better transportation--7 percent on environmental protection, 7 percent on health. This is money spent to make your cities, counties, and States cleaner, safer, and better places in which to live. And this is an important statistic. Unlike other programs in which the Federal Government is involved, the cost of administering this program is only one-twelfth of 1 percent on every dollar. That is a good record, and that is the kind of a program the Federal Government ought to undertake and carry out.
The first is, how can we help to create an economic climate so that you can use your education in a rewarding job?
Secondly, how can we keep the peace so that you can stay on the job? The most important function of your education is to equip you for a satisfying job so that you can enjoy what life has to offer to you in the future.
Our prime responsibility is to provide the finest medical care for those who were injured in wartime, and we have 170 or 180 USVA hospitals, and we have substantially increased the medical and nursing care personnel so that we give quality care to those veterans who are in these hospitals. Number two, there is not going to be any elimination of the GI educational benefits for those veterans who have served in wartime.
Let me make one alternative comment. The GI bill was passed during World War II for those 16 million Americans who served so when they got out they could get an education. It expired after World War II. Korea came along, again combat, and it was reenacted.
Now the question is whether in peacetime you should continue giving educational benefits to those who serve under an all-volunteer system?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me raise a question. We want an all-volunteer service, and we have got it. There is no more draft. I am all for it. But if you give educational benefits to an all-volunteer force, and you want them to stay in so we have career personnel, and at the same time, you give them educational benefits so that is an incentive for them to get out, it doesn't make much sense from the point of view of the Government.
Now, I think we can solve it, and this is the way it ought to be solved. If a young man volunteers, he has a high school education, we ought to give him educational opportunities in the service so that he can go to school, get his college degree so the service will have him with a higher education, rather than having him get out to get an education. That is the better way to solve it.
THE PRESIDENT. You are not going to have to give up anything. As a matter of fact, in the budget--and here is a copy of it--I have added $150 million to the primary and secondary education funding program. But I want to add this. I could show you a mess chart for education programs just like this one from the Federal Government. It would have 15 programs, and it would be just as big a mess as this one is.
Now, I have recommended that we take primary and secondary education, that we take vocational education, that we take aid for the handicapped and library programs which total roughly $3,300 million, add $150 million to it and have a block grant program. I think that is a far better way of getting Federal money from Washington to Gainesville or to Tallahassee--to your community--so that you have flexibility in the decisionmaking process as to where and how you want to put that money. Now, we would require that 75 percent of that total money would go to the disadvantaged under the definition, but it would do away with 15 programs and have one program.
There are other programs, however, that are aimed at helping the educational problems related to migrant workers, but they are not included within the general revenue sharing program.
THE PRESIDENT. I think the concept of the general revenue sharing is to help a local or State unit of government meet its financial problems and for the decisionmaking at the local level. But at the same time, the Federal Government does recognize that the migrant worker education problem is a serious one, so there are certain programs that focus in directly on that. But I don't think you ought to write into the general revenue sharing specifics as to how the money ought to be spent, or it's not general revenue sharing.
THE PRESIDENT. In the education block grant program that I talked about a minute ago--which is different from general revenue sharing--there would be money to help the migrant labor education problem, including money for bilingual education, et cetera. So there would be money either in block grants or categorical grants for that specific problem.
Thank you very, very much, Dr. Tarvin, President Abell, President Klaus, Senator Percy, Congressman Findley, Congressman Simon, students, faculty, and guests of the three great educational institutions:
We would like to know if a bill passed--a supplemental bill for the basic educational opportunity grant through Congress or Senate--if you would sign it or not sign it? We would like to know if you would veto it. Also, we would like to know what the chances are, or what you would propose to change the bill from being where students would have to pay the money back?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, as I recollect, in the budget for fiscal 1977, I recommended about $1 billion in basic opportunity grant funding, which is a substantial increase over the present. Now, we have a wide variety of programs in addition to the basic opportunity grant program. We have the loan guarantee; we have the work incentive program. There are three or four others; I can't remember their names. But it seems to me, that if the Government loans something to somebody, whether it's for business or an education or anything else, and the person signs to borrow that money on those terms, there is an obligation to repay it. Now, the terms of repayment, as I think you know, are very generous.
As I have said before, under this administration, under my Presidency, I can assure you that the United States will never, never be other than at the very top. And when I say the top, I mean not only in military capability but economic capability, industrial might, agricultural production. This is what we have to look at as we talk about the United States being number one. It is our economic, industrial, agricultural, our educational capacity, plus our military strength and will that gives America the opportunity to be the leader that it is.
Number two, on the ethnic education matter, about a week ago, the Office of Management and Budget and myself were discussing this with the head officials in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. And they are seeking a way, within the funds that have been appropriated, to continue the $1.5 million for that program. So, I can't say today that it is accomplished, but there are people in the top of HEW and in OMB who are working on it, and I am confident that they will find a solution.
Ask one more, and then I want to answer questions from some others.
Encouraging progress has also been made in working with local leaders on programs of drug education, and particularly counseling. I know that the people of Dallas must take a very special pride in the highly innovative program that has been set up with Federal seed money, and is now run by the Dallas Independent School District under Dr. Nolan Estes. This program, as I understand it, built on the philosophy that the drug problem is actually a human problem, has turned countless numbers of individuals away from drug abuse and has helped to rehabilitate many, many others.
THE PRESIDENT. I submitted to the Congress in January of this year a revised Federal aid to education program that would do away with 26 categorical grant programs and give the same amount of money with a $200 million or $300 million bonus, but do it in what we call a block grant approach.
In other words, the Federal Government would give the money to the State and to the local units of government without a requirement of matching, and instead of giving it in 26 pieces it would go in one piece. So that at the local level--and this is the crux of the matter--at the local level the people in Indianapolis or Kokomo or South Bend or Fort Wayne could make the decision themselves how they want to spend that money on their education program in their hometown.
THE PRESIDENT. These public service jobs were initiated primarily when we got into our economic troubles in 1975. I recommended at that time, to meet that current emergency, a substantial increase in public service employment, adding to the so-called CETA programs where we have a comprehensive educational and training program plus the summer youth program.
Now that we are coming out of our economic difficulties, it seems to me that we do not need to have the emergency program that we required in 1975. On the other hand, I think we should fully fund the so-called CETA program, which is an education and training program, not necessarily a public service program, because there are always instances where individuals have a temporary loss of a job, they want to be retrained for another kind of employment, and that is what CETA programs seek to do. And we will fund those programs fully, and we will continue to fund, as I have ever since I have been President, the summer youth programs--the cost is around $450 million each year--and those programs will be utilized to give the youth of America, many of them in our disadvantaged areas in major metropolitan areas--those programs will be continued as they have been in the past.
Our third century ought to be emphasizing the right of the individual, so that he is not overburdened by mass government, by mass industry, by mass labor, by mass education. The American citizen today is well enough educated that he ought to have more individual freedom and liberty, and in this next century, instead of passing more laws to overburden it, we ought to start rescinding some of the laws that inhibit and prohibit.
Now, I am not saying all of the regulations are bad, but the one that you, for example, indicate, it seems to me, is not beneficial for either boys or girls in physical education classes. I think there ought to be equity in the treatment of facilities and coaches and competition and everything else for women and men and girls and boys, but I think there are some other areas where a little more common sense might be used.
THE PRESIDENT. That is a question I have been concerned about for a long, long time. And I am glad to report to you that for a number of years it has been my deep concern and belief that private schools from primary to secondary to higher education ought to have a way in which they can receive contributions and donations without the harm and detriment of Federal taxation.
It has been my belief that it is good for the public school systems to have competition in the primary, the elementary, and the higher education fields of education. Competition in education is just as good as it is in politics, business and professions and otherwise.
So, we ought to, under our tax laws, make it as easy as possible for individuals to contribute as generously as they can to the support of private education.
I understand there are some students here from Hardin-Simmons. You have got other fine educational institutions here. Anybody from McMurry? And, of course, Abilene Christian--I know there must be some.
Now, where is that first question? Over here.
I have consistently, for a period of 10 or more years since the first Supreme Court decision, called the Brown case--I have said that court-ordered, forced busing is not the way to achieve quality education. There are better ways of achieving quality education, and some judges have recognized it and others have not.
Our emphasis should be on quality education and we can do it without those kind of court orders that, I think, have gone beyond the proper remedy.
We can ensure that every working man and woman in America who wants a job can find a job--not a Humphrey-Hawkins dead-end job, but a well-paying job with a future generated by an expanding free enterprise economy. We can ensure that our young people have an education of high quality and a job worthy of their talents.
We will improve the quality of life at work, at play, and in our homes and in our neighborhoods. We will not abandon our cities. We will encourage urban programs which assure safety in the streets, create healthy environments, and restore neighborhood pride. We will return control of our children's education to parents and local school authorities.
We will create a climate in which our economy will provide a meaningful job for everyone who wants to work and a decent standard of life for all Americans. We will ensure that all of our young people have a better chance in life than we had, an education they can use, and a career they can be proud of.
They really incorporate five points: jobs, ownership, quality health care, a reduction in crime, and better recreation facilities, and one other that falls under that category, and that is in the field of education.
THE PRESIDENT. We have some proposals that I think will be forthcoming that will show the concern this administration has for an improved educational opportunity program within the quality of life suggestion.
America's salvation is not in a revival of outdated social experiments financed by you who pay the taxes and obey the laws. I see no excuse whatsoever for arbitrary quotas on the basis of race, religion, or national origin in employment or education. In the name of justice for some, we must not do injustice to others. Opportunities should be open to all Americans on an equal basis. That is basic to the finest American principles of liberty and justice for all.
We will talk about the domestic problems--jobs, homeownership, better health, better crime control, more recreation, better education--and then we will point out some of the things that we are doing and must do in the area of foreign policy.
--Americans want homes and decent neighborhoods and schools where our children can get a quality education.
Now, let's turn to an area of special concern to this audience--education. One of the most urgent problems is to create a climate in every classroom where teachers can teach and students can learn. Quality education for every young American is my administration's goal. Major reforms are necessary in the relationship between the National, State, and local units of government, so that teachers can spend their time teaching instead of filling out Federal forms. Federal aid is necessary, but Federal aggravation must stop.
Nine months ago, I proposed to the Congress that we replace 24 paper shuffling educational bureaucracies with a single Federal program which would provide $3,300 million in direct aid to elementary and secondary schools throughout this country. The Congress has not acted.
We must ensure that low-income students have access to higher education. We must also find ways through the tax system to ease the burden on families who choose to send their children to nonpublic schools and to help families cope with the expenses of a college education. In this administration the education need of America's middle-income families will neither be forgotten or forsaken. Education is the key to a better life.
MS. DREW. Governor Carter, you've proposed a number of new or enlarged programs, including jobs and health, welfare reform, child care, aid to education, aid to cities, changes in social security and housing subsidies. You've also said that you want to balance the budget by the end of your first term. Now, you haven't put a price tag on those programs, but even if we priced them conservatively, and we count for full employment by the end of your first term, and we count for the economic growth that would occur during that period, there still isn't enough money to pay for those programs and balance the budget by any estimates that I've been able to see. So, in that case, what would give?
It resulted also in an ability to reshape our court system, our prison system, our education system, our mental health programs, and a clear assignment of responsibility and authority, and also to have our people once again understand and control our Government.
Ms. DREW. Mr. President, at Vail, after the Republican convention, you announced that you would now emphasize five new areas. Among those were jobs and housing and health, improved recreational facilities for Americans, and you also added crime. You also mentioned education.
We feel that in education we can have a slight increase, not a major increase. It's my understanding that Governor Carter has indicated that he approves of a $30 billion expenditure by the Federal Government, as far as education is concerned. At the present time we are spending roughly $3,500 million. I don't know where that money would come from.
But, as we look at the quality of life programs-jobs, health, education, crime, recreation-we feel that as we move forward with a healthier economy, we can absorb the small, necessary costs that will be required.
MR. CARTER. Well, tonight, we've bad a chance to talk a lot about the past, but I think it is time to talk about the future. Our Nation in the last 8 years has been divided as never before. It's a time for unity. It is time to draw ourselves together, to have a President and a Congress that can work together with mutual respect for a change, cooperating for a change, in the open for a change, so the people can understand their own Government. It is time for Government, industry and labor, manufacturing, agriculture, education, other entities in our society to cooperate. And it's a time for Government to understand and to cooperate with our people.
In the last few years government has gotten bigger and bigger; industry has gotten larger and larger; labor unions have gotten bigger and bigger; and our children have been the victims of mass education.
The individual worker in the plants throughout the United States should not be a small cog in a big machine. The member of a labor union must have his rights strengthened and broadened, and our children in their education should have an opportunity to improve themselves based on their talents and their abilities.
In the next 4 years, we will increase the educational opportunity for young people; we will make our health facilities and services much more available. There is no reason whatsoever why anybody should go broke in this country to get well. And they won't under the Ford administration.
We must make it easier for people to buy a home, a home of their own, while they are still young enough to enjoy it. We must make sure that our older people don't have to go broke just to get well. We must make it possible for every young American to get an education of the highest quality, an education that you can use when you get out of school--USC, Michigan, Yale, or any other of the outstanding educational institutions in this country today.
We did not throw off the bonds of oppressive government in the 18th century only to create one for ourselves two centuries later. The greatest danger I see in America today is the overwhelming of the individual--you and millions like you in this wonderful country being overwhelmed by the massive institutions of government, business, labor, communications--yes, even education. I see government growing too large, too powerful, too costly, too remote, too deeply involved in our daily lives.
But we have to have a healthy economy at home, and that means a job for everybody who wants a job; it means a home for everybody who will work for it and save for it. And that means we have to get rid of the crime on the streets so that you and your children will be free of any terrorism, either at home or abroad. It means that you have to have the best education, the kind of health care that you need and that you can afford.
So, we want only good health, good education, a better tax system, responsible action in meeting the problems of crime, equality of life in America.
We want these young people that I have seen on both sides of the street-we want them to get an education so that they can not only have an education but one that will do them good when they get old enough and want a job. And we're going to get that in the education system.
I am totally opposed, completely against arbitrary quotas in hiring and in education. Individual merit must be rewarded. Opportunity should be open to all Americans on an equal basis. I, today, renew my pledge to be President of all the people, not with wild promises and vague plans but with a proven record of performance.
THE PRESIDENT. My vision for America, first, is that we shall be a nation at peace, as we are today. My vision of the next 4 years is also that we will have a better quality of life; that we will have our younger people having a better opportunity for quality education; that every person who wants a job will have a job; that the best health care will be available at prices people can afford; that we will have a record of safety and security in the streets of America for those 215 million Americans who ought to be able to walk in their community or any other part of the country without the threat of crime. My vision would also include an opportunity for greater recreation capability.
In other words, peace, a job, better health, better education, no crime--or control over the criminal situation--and a better opportunity for recreation-those are the visions that I have.
But I can say this: I'm doing the best I can to get away from that. And during the next 10 days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running television advertisements or newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford's character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford's campaign. And I hope that we can leave those issues, in the next 10 days, about personalities and mistakes of the past--we've both matte some mistakes--and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people.
Now we have a very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization-I'd say several hundred of them, and they are very fine and very highly qualified.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
Also, I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments and also to remove the prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money, so that it can be used to improve education and health care. We have now, for instance, only 7 percent of the total education costs being financed by the Federal Government. When the Nixon-Ford administration started, this was 10 percent. That's a 30-percent reduction in the portion that the Federal Government contributes to education in just 8 years and, as you know, the education costs have gone up tremendously.
The Department of HUD is enforcing the new legislation that takes care of redlining. What we are doing is saying that there are opportunities--business opportunities, educational opportunities, responsibilities--where people with talent--blacks or any other minority--can fully qualify.
We've got a 30-percent or 40-percent unemployment rate among minority young people. And there has been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language. And that's where there has been a great generation of despair and ill-health and lack of education and lack of purposefulness and a lack of hope for the future.
MR. CARTER. I would not work hard to support any of those. We have always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed but the passage of them has been fairly slow and few and far between. In the 200-year history, there has been a very cautious approach to this. Quite often we have a transient problem. I am strongly against abortion. I think abortion is wrong. I don't think the Government ought to do anything to encourage abortion, but I don't favor a constitutional amendment on the subject. But short of a constitutional amendment, and within the confines of a Supreme Court ruling, I will do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures. I personally don't believe that the Federal Government ought to finance abortions, but I draw the line and don't support a constitutional amendment. However, I honor the right of people to seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on prayer in the schools, and on abortion, but among those you named, I won't actively work for the passage of any of them.
Employment ought to be restored to our people. We have become almost a welfare state. We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did 8 years ago when the Republicans took over the White House. Our people want to go back to work. Our education system can be improved. Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government, and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained. Our housing programs have gone bad. It used to be that the average family could own a house, but now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes.
I want to talk to you today about some of the most remarkable people in this country. These people brought us from the horse and buggy era to the space age, from widespread illiteracy to the finest educational system in the world, from the threat of many crippling and killing diseases to the cure for those diseases, from the early days of the telegraph to instant global communication, from a largely rural Nation to the greatest industrial power in the history of mankind.
But as you have noticed, I have three very special guests here today that are close to me and have been very helpful. One you have met, our son Jack. Then I also have another special guest who has been working with me and traveling to help the cause, and I think it is especially appropriate in an educational institution with the great reputation that you have here at Villanova. One of the outstanding Members of the House or the Senate for 19 years was a Democratic Member of the Congress, Representative Edith Green. Edith Green, I can tell you, was a formidable opponent and a welcome ally. We worked together on many, many programs. We seemed to understand and try to do things in conjunction on educational matters. But Edith Green of the great State of Oregon, who retired 2 years ago, has been helping me. I just want you to know Edith Green is with me and helping in my ideas and recommendations concerning education. Edith, will you please stand up.
Villanova University is truly an outstanding example of those privately supported institutions which have contributed so much to America's greatness and to our country's progress. You share in America's distinguished tradition of private higher education, a tradition that is a century older than our country itself.
The strength, the vitality of America's privately endowed colleges and universities are essential to our educational system in America. If these private institutions should close, shifting the burden from private donors to public taxpayers, the tax load would be infinitely heavier. We must not let this happen, and as far as I am concerned, we will not.
Let me repeat with emphasis what I have said many, many times before. I approve, support, and encourage the principle of volunteer giving to help finance higher education, and I will continue to strongly oppose any legislative proposals which discourage such support, including those which would limit Charitable tax deductions, disallow the full value of appreciated assets, or exclude the State tax deductions.
We must also find, and find as quickly and effectively as possible, ways through the tax system of actually easing the burden of families whose sons and daughters attend nonpublic schools and to help families cope with the expenses of a college education.
Although I am a product of public education through the University of Michigan, I was the beneficiary of a law school education at Yale Law School.
But I believe very deeply that the competition of nonpublic schools to the public school system is helpful in upgrading and maintaining the level of the public schools. Competition in education is just as important as competition on the athletic field, in business, or elsewhere, and we must maintain our nonpublic school systems throughout the United States.
In 200 years as a free people much has changed in our Nation, but America's basic goals remain the same. Americans want a job with a good future; Americans want homes in decent neighborhoods and schools with quality education; Americans want physical security, safety against war, and safety against crime; safety against pollution in the water we drink and in the air that we breathe; we want medical and hospital care when we are sick and costs that will not wipe out our savings; we want the time and the opportunity to enlarge our experience through recreation and through travel, both at home and abroad.
But also, we need to make certain that our younger generation has a quality education. The Federal Government does contribute to local and State educational programs. But I was dumbfounded just the other day to find that there are 110 different Federal educational programs. If you can, imagine how many bureaucrats in Washington are managing 110 educational programs.
But it's a very special privilege and pleasure for me, if I might have the dispensation, to introduce to all of you a very dear friend of mine who is also a great and long-standing friend and supporter of education. I take the pleasure of introducing her because she served as a Member of the House of Representatives with me for 19 years. She was on the other side of the aisle. She was a very formidable person in debate. I always did better when she was on my side. But let me assure you there was never a more knowledgeable, more dedicated person in the field of education than the former Democratic Member of the House of Representatives, Edith Green. Edith is here some place. Right here.
We in America have, from our very earliest days, developed an educational system as significant and as revolutionary as our political structure. Educational opportunity for all citizens was a crucial part of the vision which our Nation's founders had. They knew that ignorance and freedom could not coexist.
Education is now the Nation's number one business. Today, 60 million Americans attend school: 10 million in postsecondary education and 50 million in elementary and secondary schools. Over 2 1/2 million Americans are school teachers and school administrators.
More money is spent on education in America than any other single governmental endeavor. In all, America is making a huge investment in quality education, and American taxpayers expect a substantial return for their investment.
Early generations of Americans looked upon education as a cherished privilege, a steppingstone to a successful and a happy life. Our schools, our colleges educated millions of immigrant children who spoke no English when they arrived on our shores. These people and their descendants valued education above all. To them, self-discipline was both essential and natural. If self-discipline was missing, then imposed discipline in the home and the school was accepted as reasonable and proper.
In the midst of all of this, it is not surprising that education and our children suffer. Headlines, if not personal family experiences, tell us that crime in the schools is a very serious problem. The National Education Association reports that over the past few years, there has been a dramatic increase in school crime and school violence.
The heart of America's education system, the key to success or failure for the millions of students sitting in classrooms, is not buildings or dollars spent. The key is the classroom teacher. All of us, as individuals and collectively as a nation, owe much, a very great deal, to our teachers during our lifetime.
But how can we help our teachers meet the awesome demands of the future? How can we channel more of the $130 billion now spent on education each year into classrooms to benefit our children and avoid the bureaucratic snarls that somehow seem to plague too many school systems?
In the past decade, America has responded to the problems of education with a variety of Federal programs designed to meet specific needs through assistance to State and local school agencies. Each new program was aimed at educational problems of particular segments of our population. As a result, the proliferation of narrow, categorical programs has reached a point, really a crescendo, where it is causing confusion, duplication and, I think, unnecessary waste.
Local citizens and administrators are buried under an avalanche of paperwork, generated by no less than 110 separate and frequently overlapping Federal aid to education programs, and we have got to do something about it.
My administration will not try to out-promise or out-bid the opposition. You know that every new program has its price, and every politician who promises new programs has an obligation to say how much it will cost and who will pay for it. You are too sophisticated, too experienced, too knowledgeable to simply throw your weight to the highest bidder. I owe you more than an auction for Federal education dollars. I am working for meaningful, much needed reform in Government's whole approach to educational assistance.
As President, the first piece of legislation that I signed back in August of 1974, over 2 years ago, was the Omnibus Education Act. It improved the distribution of Federal education funds; it unclogged, to some extent, the administration of Federal education programs. This was a distinct move in the right direction, but in a major proposal that I sent to the Congress in March of this year, I urged the further consolidation of Federal educational programs in the interest of service to local schools, effective administration, and bona fide economy.
It was interesting in this past year since that proposal was made, that all or most of the State educational heads, or whatever their precise title might be, agreed with the proposal, because they felt that was a far more effective way-with infinitely less red tape--to get that money for elementary and secondary education from the Federal Government right at the local level.
When I spoke at Ohio State--and you know, somebody from Michigan who gets invited to speak at a commencement at Ohio State, you never forget the experience--[laughter]--and they treated me better as a commencement speaker than they treat the Michigan football teams from time to time--[laughter]--but when I was at Ohio State 2 years ago, I urged that the transition from the world of education to the world of work, a very crucial juncture in the life of every individual, be explored by the most knowledgeable people in the field of education.
I said at that time, the Nation needs new ways to bring the world of work and institutions of education closer together. The response from the education and business communities has been more than heartening. The U.S. Office of Education, the Departments of Labor and Commerce, private business and industry have responded to my challenge in a very encouraging way. In the past 2 years, scores of programs have been developed to help high school students prepare for Worthwhile occupations while completing their education. These developments are new and really exciting. They are innovative, and they are a fine example of Government as a helpful servant rather than a meddling master in the area of education.
Meeting the educational challenges of America's third century must not be the responsibility of educators and teachers alone. They cannot and must [not] be called upon to assume the burden of curing all of society's ills single-handedly. It must be a cooperative effort by parents, school board members, teachers, religious leaders, government officials, businessmen, labor leaders--every single one of us.
We do face great problems in America today. Overcoming them requires more than dollars, more than technology, more than programs. We need a belief in ourselves. We need the will, the education, the discipline to take action.
Let us take a new look at ourselves in America. Let us see a constructive partnership between the education community and the rest of our society. Let us seek the highest standards in every aspect of American life.
Among the other things that involve quality of life in America is the finest education. We have the teachers and the administrators and the facilities and, believe me, under this administration, we will make a maximum effort to make sure that quality education, with control at the local level, exists under the Ford administration.
We are going to have quality education. We are going to have health care that is affordable, the best in the world. We are going to see to it that the criminal element in this country goes into prison and the victims of crime are protected.
I want it so that young and old, that all of our 215 million Americans, can walk those streets in Rochester, New York, Detroit, Grand Rapids, in safety and security. We are going to lick the problem of crime in America. And we want a quality education for all Americans. We are going to have the best health care. People will be able to afford it.
Last week, the Congress passed the elementary and secondary education bill, and I found it on my desk. Any reservations I might have about some of its provisions--and I do have--fade in comparison to the urgent needs of America for quality education. I will sign it in a few days.

Your professors tell you that education unlocks creative genius and imagination and that you must develop your human potential. And students have accepted this. But then "Catch 22" enters the picture: You spend 4 years in school, graduate, go into the job market, and are told that the .rules have changed, there is no longer a demand for your specialty--another educational discipline is now required.
Although this Administration will not make promises it cannot keep, I do want to pledge one thing to you here and now. I will do everything in my power to bring education and employers together in a new climate of credibility--an atmosphere in which universities turn out scholars and employers turn them on.
Ever since President Abraham Lincoln initiated the concept of land grant colleges, set up to bring educators closer to the people and students closer to the land, the Federal Government has been interested in the practical application of education.
I propose a great new partnership of labor and educators. Why can't the universities of America open their doors wide to working men and women, not only as Students but as teachers? Practical problem solvers can contribute much to education, whether or not they hold degrees. The fact of the matter is that education is being strangled--by degrees.
Next year, I will ask Congress to extend two laws which are expiring. One provides for higher education, the other for vocational education. Both are essential because we need new jobs and we need new skills, academically as well as vocationally.
For you, the time has come to test the theories of the academic world in the laboratory of life. As President, I invite students and graduates and faculties to contribute their energies and their genius to the solution of massive problems facing America. I invite your ideas and your initiatives in fighting inflation, in providing realistic education, in making sure our free enterprise system continues to give freedom as well as enterprise.
Show us how to increase productivity. Show us how to combine new lifestyles with old responsibilities. Show us how universities can work with industry and labor unions to devise a whole new community of learning across this great land. Show us how work-study programs can become a part of the ongoing educational process. Show us how new skills can improve technology while humanizing its use.
At home the Government must help people in doing things they cannot achieve as individuals. Accordingly, I have asked the Secretaries of Commerce, Labor, and HEW to report to me new ways to bring the world of work and the institutions of education closer together. For your Government as well as you, the time has come for a fusion of the realities of a work-a-day life with the teachings of academic institutions.
The States have always assumed the primary responsibility for public education. That tradition in my judgment is very sound and Ohio State University and my alma mater, the University of Michigan, are excellent examples. But there is now too much confusion about which level of Government is to play which role in post-secondary education.
Discussions will be held with Governors, State legislators, academic leaders, Federal officials, and the consumers of education.
Our goal of quality education is on a collision course with the escalating demands for the public dollar. Everyone must have a clearer understanding and a clearer agreement on who is responsible for the specific aspects of the direction and the financing of a college education.
Oftentimes our Federal Government tries to do too much and unfortunately achieves too little. There are, for example, approximately 380 separate Federal educational programs beyond the high school level, some duplicating others, administered by some 50 separate executive agencies. The result inevitably is a bureaucracy that often provides garbled guidelines instead of taut lifelines to good and available jobs.
Well, I for one consider California part of the Union and a very important part of our Union. One out of every ten Americans lives in this great State. You have the largest of all delegations in the Congress and the largest number of eligible voters of any State in the Union. You excel in so many, many fields-in industry, agriculture, automobiles, advanced technologies, education, effective State and local government, the arts, recreation, conservation, natural resources.
Mr. Prime Minister, the United States is a nation of citizens with many backgrounds, many ancestries. Some of our very finest citizens have a Japanese ancestry. We are proud of the tremendous contributions that they make to a better America. We are proud of them because of the significant contributions they have made to our culture, to our industry, to our trade, to our education, and to our government.
We in the United States are on the eve of our Bicentennial. One of the things that we are particularly aware of is the prominent role played by men and women of German descent in the building of America over the past two centuries. They have made tremendous contributions in fields as widespread as education and science, culture and the arts.
We must learn more about people, about the development of communities, architecture, engineering, education, motivation, productivity, public health and medicine, arts and sciences, political, legal, and social organization. All of these specialities and many, many more are required if young people like you are to help this Nation develop an agenda for our future--your future, our country's future.
I challenge, for example, the medical students in this audience to put on their agenda the achievement of a cure for cancer. I challenge the engineers in this audience to devise new techniques for developing cheap, clean, and plentiful energy, and as a byproduct, to control floods. I challenge the law students in this audience to find ways to speed the administration of equal justice and make good citizens out of convicted criminals. I challenge education, those of you as education majors, to do real teaching for real life. I challenge the arts majors in this audience to compose the great American symphony, to write the great American novel, and to enrich and inspire our daily lives.
I am glad that Tulane University and other great American educational institutions are reaching out to others in programs to work with developing nations, and I look forward with confidence to your participation in every aspect of America's future.
As we look at the progress in your country, which includes great educational advancements for your people, social progress for the people of Tunisia, an increase in the per capita income of the people of Tunisia, you should be very proud of the progress that has been achieved. But I know that the efforts of your President, of you, and others are aimed toward greater progress in the days ahead.
Let me reiterate, if I might, and thank you most sincerely for the honor and the pleasure of speaking here today to the graduating class of the University of Pennsylvania, one of America's great educational complexes consisting of 16 institutions of higher learning and personal enlightenment--17 if you include Smokey Joe's. [Laughter]
Franklin's own life was a continuous self-educational process. Practical wisdom was his aim. We find nowhere in his writings the false concept of "completion of education." He saw no limitations to what an individual could learn.
Today, we look back 200 years, not merely to take pride in our history, although we do; not merely to mark the high priority which Americans have always accorded to education and higher learning, although we do. We look back during this Bicentennial to learn some practical lessons for today and tomorrow.
We are both proud of our independence, yet we recognize the need of working together. Each year marks increasing contacts, increasing cooperation between the Spanish and the American people in a growing number of fields ranging from medicine to urban development, to the arts, to agriculture, to science, and education.
I think it is instructive to recall that this Academy was founded during the Jeffersonian administration. Thomas Jefferson was consistently suspicious of large standing armies and an ardent supporter in his insistence on civilian authority over the military. Nevertheless, Thomas Jefferson was a champion of quality and educational excellence. President Jefferson knew that freedom's defense could not be entrusted to amateurs in a world of expansionist powers and opportunistic pirates. Whatever price our poor and youthful Republic had to pay for its full independence and the protection of its lawful interest, Jefferson and the Congress of his day--and, I might add, the people--were willing to pay.
Your apprenticeship, with its basic education, is ending, but you may be expected to use its lessons at any time. It is an enormous human test, but testing makes men as well as nations stronger and far more confident.
Lastly, and just as important as any of the others, we believe in freedom for the individual. Freedom in what way? Freedom against an all-powerful government, freedom against mass education where every individual is educated as a robot, freedom against an impersonal production line, freedom against all of the things that take away from you and me and our neighbors and our friends the opportunity to do something different, because you are different from everybody else.
But now our third century, I believe, should be an era of individual freedom. The mass approach of the modern world places a premium on creativity and individuality. We see mass production, mass education, mass population. They must not smother individual expression or limit individual opportunity. Individualism is a safeguard against the sameness of society. A government too large and bureaucratic can stifle individual initiative by a frustrating statism.
The judiciary is the Nation's standing army in defense of individual freedom, but all segments of our society--government, business, labor, and education-must work to see that the individual is not stifled.
Now in the third, the challenge, as I see it, is to advance individual independence. If we don't do something in this third century to protect the individual against mass education, mass government, mass labor, where the rights of the individual are lost because of the totality of the effort--the individual has to be given his unique opportunity to participate and not get lost in the crowd.
This wonderful independent voter wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family at prices he can afford, and so do we as Republicans.
I am not satisfied, but between the educational opportunities under the GI bill and the other efforts that have been made, the GI from the Vietnam war is, I think, doing as well as we possibly can, looking at the overall economic circumstances we face.
Your recent veto of the education bill was accompanied by a statement that you supported educational funding, but that national economic and budget conditions precluded your acceptance of the size of the appropriations being recommended by Congress.
My question is: In light of your directives to Federal agencies to solve the problem between educational needs and adequate funding--this question is two-fold--has your Administration examined new funding policies, that would it be possible? Secondly, is it likely that the Federal Government once again will study broader entitlement programs such as voucher systems in an attempt to expand equality of access to education at all levels?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me say, Father Raynor, that if I recall precisely the budget that I submitted for education, primary as well as secondary, and higher education for fiscal 1976, it was a higher figure overall, in each case above the corresponding figure for the preceding year, is that correct? I am almost certain that is correct.
Now, that may not be enough in the minds of the prospective beneficiaries, but I think it does show a recognition that we know you have had higher costs, at either the higher education level or the primary and secondary level.
The veto is a constitutional authority given to a President. It is not a negative, it is an affirmative authority. In every instance where there has been a veto sustained, we have had further negotiation with the Congress, and the net result has been a reasonable compromise. And I think we can do the same thing in the field of education.
Now, on the latter question, I am a firm believer that the public educational system educates children better if they have competition from nonpublic schools, whether they are Catholic, whether they are Lutheran, whether they are Jewish, whether they are Christian Reform in the Dutch background that I had over in Michigan. Competition in education makes better education for all children.
Furthermore, the Department of Labor's modest family budget without higher education requires about $14,000 annually. This means that the Federal aid programs discriminate against middle-income families, including both blue collar and white collar workers. Is your Administration aware of this problem? If so, what program changes are contemplated?
But let me add one thing. We have had these loan programs to students in higher education for a number of years. It is awfully disappointing to see the very poor repayment schedule of a lot of the students. I looked at the figures the other day, and you get some variation, but as I recall, it is somewhere between 25 and 10 percent--how you judge it.
We have mass education. We have mass industry. We have mass government. We have mass communication. I think the American people, whether they are in Rhode Island or Michigan or California or Florida or Alaska or Hawaii--I don't care where they come from--they want their individuality preserved and expanded. They don't want to be subjected to massive anything. They want to believe in their family and themselves, and that should be our objective in the third century of America's history.
It is my judgment, in the third century of America's greatness--and I go back to what I said at the outset--the American people still want their individual liberty, and they are going to fight for it. They are going to demand it. They aren't going to be overwhelmed by big government, big labor, big business, big education, massive communication.
He wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family--and at prices that he can afford.
In Edith Green's area of outstanding expertise--education--I don't think there was a Member of the House or Senate, Democrat or Republican, who was more knowledgeable and more articulate than she with ideas and, I think, thoughts, programs that would have been so important for education. And I thank you again for being here, Edith.
The independent voter wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family at prices that he can afford. We as Republicans have an identical view.
Since California is almost a model of the whole United States--in its diversity of industry and agriculture, its urban and rural interests, its internal and international trade and commerce, its steady growth and the attendant challenges in transportation, education, employment, and human needs--almost any national problem would be an appropriate one to discuss in California context. Any subject that is of major importance to Californians is also of deep concern to all Americans.
We should get away from the concept that the individual should be mass educated, that he should be controlled by a big government. The individual ought to have the right of expression on his own. And I can assure you that as far as this Administration is concerned, we are going to promote the right of the individual to be free from big government, big education, big labor, big business, and the like.
And then I think it is important that we make a special effort to make certain and to make positive that individuals have a growth of freedom rather than the heavy hand of government.
The third century of our country ought to emphasize the freedom of the individual. We are all different. We shouldn't have mass education. We shouldn't have mass government. We shouldn't have mass labor unions. We shouldn't have ourselves computerized according to what some machine says.
Let me add at this point, if I might, a matter of deep concern to me, a matter that I am positive is of deep concern to all those here and 214 million Americans. We have tried hard, we have written laws, we have appropriated money to accomplish quality education for the young in America. In 1954 the courts of this country decided that one way, in their estimation, to achieve that was court-ordered forced busing. Now, regardless of how we individually may feel, the law of the land must be upheld.
But if I could give you a view that I have expressed, not just recently but for 10 or more years, there is a better way to achieve quality education in America than by forced busing. We can and we will find a better way.
As we approach our third century, I see this era as one of the fulfillment of the individual citizen. I see a century devoted to education, which equips young men and women, like the students of SMU, to make their own decisions rather than permit their future to be programmed by massive government structures that an imaginative writer foresaw for 1984--a nightmarish fantasy of what our third century could be.
I place a high premium on creativity, originality, and your right to differentiate yourself from the mass. Today's mounting danger is from mass government, mass education, and mass technology, and we must not let them prevail.
I am especially proud of the role of free education in preserving individuality. Education is vital to my vision of our third century. Only education can equip individuals to take responsibility for their own lives in the face of pressures of mass systems of society. Education must provide the perception upon which rests the quality of individuality.
This generation bears a very special task--the preservation of individualism. You are the bulwark of individualism. So is your family. So is your local community and, especially, schools like Southern Methodist University, which join the public educational institutions in cross-germination of ideas.
My own background included two experiences in higher education: one, the University of Michigan, the other Yale University; one public, the other private. I value both. I buy an open market for ideas.
Education is the key to diversity which will determine the kind of people we will be. It must not become a mass product. All the armies, weapons systems of our defense will mean absolutely nothing without self-reliant individuals who retain the cherished qualities of Americanism. That is one great purpose of education.
But that growth can be nourished. On the portico of Angell Hall on my old campus at Ann Arbor, there is an inscription from an act of Congress, adopted in 1787--the Northwest Ordinance Act--which states: "Religion, morality, [and] knowledge, being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged."
Let us apply the theories of education in the laboratory of life. I urge students and graduates and faculties to direct their genius, their energy to the solution of the problems facing America. I challenge you to help make not only America but American life beautiful, inspiring. You can do it.
In private education there is a direct citizen participation in the educational process. SMU is not dependent on government funding that establishes a rigid requirement or rigid guidelines. To maintain its very unique qualities, Southern Methodist University takes responsibility for its own support. And I commend its supporters, and you should all be most thankful for them.
I am concerned about the very heavy burden falling upon the working, middle-class citizens who are struggling to pay tuition and costs at both public and private colleges. I am also concerned that private higher education is now in financial difficulty.
Private institutions provide a leavening and stimulating influence for the public universities and the public colleges. Their continuing strength and vitality are essential to higher education. We must help to keep this competition going between the private as well as the public colleges and universities. Educators must innovate and respond to the world in which students of all ages and all backgrounds find themselves.
They must offer something truly different, truly important. Private education, free of government constraints, enjoys boundless freedom to experiment in vital areas that may fall outside general public support.
I have the deepest confidence in America's future and our educational resources. The schools of this Nation--private as well as public--can help to inspire the lives of Americans with new meaning and with new quality. Both private and public educators must combine their genius in preparing men and women for our challenges of the third century.
Now, education is only one facet of this crisis. It also goes into the other social systems--transportation, communications, recreation within the cities. I don't recall hearing any programs recently by this Administration, the past Administration, about reversing this--what I would term a spiral downward of our big cities--to correct that problem. Because if we don't correct the problem in the near future, killing the cities will thereby lead to a worsening of life in the United States, if you want to use a broader term.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there are a number of Federal educational programs that are aimed at helping local communities in a very broad sense. But the one that is aimed specifically at meeting the problem of those communities that are under court order or under HEW administrative requirement for the current fiscal year--if my recollection is accurate--it is about $250 million.
I applaud your efforts to revitalize the city, Ken. Your new container ports, your commercial buildings, your educational institutions--I think these testify to the commitment that a person is making to make this city, a great city in the history of the United States, a better place in which to live. I thank you very much.
We should make our third century the century of individual freedom--freedom from mass government, freedom from mass education, freedom from mass industry, freedom from mass unions, freedom for each and every one of us. We don't want to be a computer; we want to be individuals as we grow and mature and express our views and act by ourselves. And that ought to be the objective of our third century--individual freedom.
They allege that this is the way that the courts ought to achieve quality education. I strongly, vehemently disagree with the Court's decision, based on the Constitution, as the best way to achieve quality education. I have had that view for 10 years or more.
Now, until the courts decide that there is a better way to achieve quality education under their interpretation of the Constitution, there is nothing that a President can do, there is nothing that the Congress can do, except what the Congress did a year ago under the leadership of Congressman Marv Esch, who introduced an amendment in the House of Representatives, which was passed and approved in both the House and the Senate, which listed seven or eight steps to achieve the constitutional handling of how to achieve quality education, and the last of that criteria was busing.
Unfortunately, few courts, few Federal courts, have followed the guidelines of the Esch amendment. I wish they would. But until the Court either uses that criteria or changes their way in which they want to constitutionally achieve quality education, there is nothing a President can do, and not much more that a Member of the House or Senate can do.
If I might reminisce just a moment--this is early fall in the great State of Connecticut--it hardly seems possible that about 40 years ago, I came from the State of Michigan in August of 1935 and spent the next 5-plus years in New Haven, working for one of the finest people that I have ever known. He gave me my first job and was tremendously influential in helping to guide me in how to handle the job. But more importantly he gave me the opportunity not only to have a job but to further my education. For that wonderful opportunity to me, I want to thank, before all of you, a very old and very dear friend of mine, Ducky Pond of Yale University.
Only a short 25 years from now, I see America, whose citizens reside in a community of peace with other nations; share the still highest standard of living in the world; live longer because killer diseases have been conquered and the quality of life enhanced; and enjoy opportunities and housing and education and jobs limited only by their personal initiatives and long-range objectives; experience individual liberties and freedoms which have not only been secured but expanded; whose citizens share a national will and spirit which is still climbing as this Nation moves well into its third century.
Last week, the Congress passed the elementary and secondary education bill, and I found it on my desk. Any reservations I might have about some of its provisions--and I do have--fade in comparison to the urgent needs of America for quality education. I will sign it in a few days.

I am consequently considering the veterans education bill in this light. But your Government, of necessity, has to be constrained by other considerations as well. We are all soldiers in a war against brutal inflation. The veterans education bill more than likely will come before me very shortly for action. It comes when I am working hard, along with others from the Congress, labor, management, and otherwise, on a nonpartisan battle against excessive Government spending.
I suspect this is the first Federal aid to education bill that has ever been signed by a left-handed President. I attach no significance to that, but it was difficult with a person with a short name to use so many pens. [Laughter]
President Eisenhower once said, in discussing education, and I quote: The Federal role should be merely to facilitate, never to control education.
It does provide, in my opinion, for a more effective distribution of Federal funds to help elementary and secondary schools so that our Federal tax dollars can be more appropriately and efficiently and economically utilized to improve education throughout our 50 States.
It is my judgment that H.R. 69 represents the kind of an approach that in this day and age we must follow if we are to do the right thing in education, in housing, and in a multitude of other highly essential programs for the benefit of our country as a whole.
I speak here specifically of the Cost of Living Council proposal, some actions taken on appropriation matters, the action on housing, the action on pension legislation, and the legislation affecting education.
I want to express my appreciation for the response that has come already in the Cost of Living Council monitoring legislation; the action taken in reference to some of our spending problems; the action taken in housing, in education, and in pension reform. These are all landmark pieces of legislation. This is a good achievement for the Congress, and this is legislation that I am proud of and privileged to sign as President of the United States.

Your professors tell you that education unlocks creative genius and imagination and that you must develop your human potential. And students have accepted this. But then "Catch 22" enters the picture: You spend 4 years in school, graduate, go into the job market, and are told that the .rules have changed, there is no longer a demand for your specialty--another educational discipline is now required.
Although this Administration will not make promises it cannot keep, I do want to pledge one thing to you here and now. I will do everything in my power to bring education and employers together in a new climate of credibility--an atmosphere in which universities turn out scholars and employers turn them on.
Ever since President Abraham Lincoln initiated the concept of land grant colleges, set up to bring educators closer to the people and students closer to the land, the Federal Government has been interested in the practical application of education.
I propose a great new partnership of labor and educators. Why can't the universities of America open their doors wide to working men and women, not only as Students but as teachers? Practical problem solvers can contribute much to education, whether or not they hold degrees. The fact of the matter is that education is being strangled--by degrees.
Next year, I will ask Congress to extend two laws which are expiring. One provides for higher education, the other for vocational education. Both are essential because we need new jobs and we need new skills, academically as well as vocationally.
For you, the time has come to test the theories of the academic world in the laboratory of life. As President, I invite students and graduates and faculties to contribute their energies and their genius to the solution of massive problems facing America. I invite your ideas and your initiatives in fighting inflation, in providing realistic education, in making sure our free enterprise system continues to give freedom as well as enterprise.
Show us how to increase productivity. Show us how to combine new lifestyles with old responsibilities. Show us how universities can work with industry and labor unions to devise a whole new community of learning across this great land. Show us how work-study programs can become a part of the ongoing educational process. Show us how new skills can improve technology while humanizing its use.
At home the Government must help people in doing things they cannot achieve as individuals. Accordingly, I have asked the Secretaries of Commerce, Labor, and HEW to report to me new ways to bring the world of work and the institutions of education closer together. For your Government as well as you, the time has come for a fusion of the realities of a work-a-day life with the teachings of academic institutions.
The States have always assumed the primary responsibility for public education. That tradition in my judgment is very sound and Ohio State University and my alma mater, the University of Michigan, are excellent examples. But there is now too much confusion about which level of Government is to play which role in post-secondary education.
Discussions will be held with Governors, State legislators, academic leaders, Federal officials, and the consumers of education.
Our goal of quality education is on a collision course with the escalating demands for the public dollar. Everyone must have a clearer understanding and a clearer agreement on who is responsible for the specific aspects of the direction and the financing of a college education.
Oftentimes our Federal Government tries to do too much and unfortunately achieves too little. There are, for example, approximately 380 separate Federal educational programs beyond the high school level, some duplicating others, administered by some 50 separate executive agencies. The result inevitably is a bureaucracy that often provides garbled guidelines instead of taut lifelines to good and available jobs.
I am delighted to have an opportunity to participate in this swearing in of Alan because, not only his talents are superb and his education and reputation are of the finest but I like his approach. He is recognized as an optimist in the field of economic policy, and I happen to believe that despite some of the problems we face, we have to be optimistic about what we can do about them.
Note: The President spoke at 9:32 a.m. in the East Room at the White House. His remarks and both the morning and afternoon sessions of the conference were broadcast live on public television.Subject areas for subsequent meetings included labor, State and local government, agriculture and food, transportation, natural resources and recreation, business and manufacturing, housing and construction, banking and finance, and health, education, and welfare.
George has given the Nation the benefit of his down-to-earth wisdom, his leadership, and his guidance in many, many areas. You in Vermont know those areas infinitely better than I--education, electric power development, betterment of rural America, and more importantly today, foreign relations. This very different, this wide spectrum of legislative expertise and activity--I think they only suggest the breadth and the depth and the greatness of this man.
In higher education, if my recollection is correct, I voted for the existing higher education act. Therefore, I feel that it fundamentally is what the Federal Government should do in this area.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have personally expressed, over a long period of time, that I think a tax credit proposal is a good proposal. The Supreme Court, unfortunately a year or so ago, in effect declared such a program--I think it was in the Pennsylvania case3--as unconstitutional. I think that is regrettable because competition in education, between private and public, is good for the student. There is no reason why there should be a monopoly in education just on the public side. And private education has contributed over a long period of time at the primary, secondary, and graduate levels significantly to a better educated America. And I would hope that we could find some constitutional way in which to help private schools.
THE PRESIDENT. At the outset, I wish to make it very, very direct: I deplore the violence that I have read about and seen on television. I think that is most unfortunate. I would like to add this, however: The court decision in that case,5 in my judgment, was not the best solution to quality education in Boston.
I have consistently opposed forced busing to achieve racial balance as a solution to quality education, and therefore, I respectfully disagree with the judge's order.
If I might add parenthetically, his problemsolving has not been in a small part of the spectrum. His problemsolving has covered the waterfront, so to speak, with the environment, education, taxation, transportation.
What he has done in the field of education is really landmark. And all of us who feel that we must upgrade education for the future generations and for the benefit of our country, this should be a particular selling point for all of you as you go the length and the breadth of our great State.
I know from my own experience that competition in athletics is good for the players, the spectators. I know that competition in business is good for the businessman, for the consumer. I know in education or law or any other field of endeavor, competition is a necessary ingredient if we want the best produced for those who will be the beneficiaries.
Now, Henry and I share--we have talked about it before, we talked about it last night--we share in the desire to achieve quality education for every child in every State. That is our aim, that is our objective. Now, there may be some differences as to how that is achieved and accomplished, but let me say that in this very difficult area, I am impressed with Henry's recommendation that a commission be established for the purpose of trying to get some uniformity, some sensible answers out of the United States courts as far as quality education is concerned, and I commend you for that recommendation, Henry.
We came to some other conclusions in these various meetings that we had where business, labor, education, housing, economists contributed very significantly to the thoughts and the recommendations that we finally put together in a 31-point program package. But we came to some other conclusions.
It should be a source of great pride to alm of us that this country is now providing higher education and training to 1 million veterans of the Vietnam era. But like all of us, they are feeling the pinch of inflation and feeling it badly. With this in mind, we have proposed that their wide range of benefits be increased to keep up with the cost of living.
THE PRESIDENT. But in addition, they did add a $600 loan provision to the veteran. They did add 9 more months of eligibility beyond what either World War II or Korean veterans got in the way of educational benefits.
Well, I for one consider California part of the Union and a very important part of our Union. One out of every ten Americans lives in this great State. You have the largest of all delegations in the Congress and the largest number of eligible voters of any State in the Union. You excel in so many, many fields-in industry, agriculture, automobiles, advanced technologies, education, effective State and local government, the arts, recreation, conservation, natural resources.
And I know, Bob, of your personal interest in education. You are interested in health legislation. So you have had not only great experience in the field of agriculture but you have had an interest in environment, our ecology. You have had an interest in energy, you have had an interest in jobs and health and education. Yes, your experience in these areas has been invaluable to the people in this Congressional district.
Then you have Frank Southworth.2 I know Frank. I know the problems, some of the difficult areas of the city of Denver. He has got range and depth and experience. He served on the school board and has been a leader in trying to give quality education to the people and to the students of Denver. I congratulate him and urge his full and total support.
Like all of the world, America has profited very greatly, Mr. Chancellor, from Austria's great contributions to the arts, to the law, education, medicine, and psychology; and of course, there is the great legacy of music, the legacy of Vienna that the whole world treasures, the music of Mozart, the Strausses, and so many others; additionally, the great importance that Austria has served as a continuing force for peace and stability throughout the world.
Mr. Prime Minister, the United States is a nation of citizens with many backgrounds, many ancestries. Some of our very finest citizens have a Japanese ancestry. We are proud of the tremendous contributions that they make to a better America. We are proud of them because of the significant contributions they have made to our culture, to our industry, to our trade, to our education, and to our government.
Governments, themselves, can't do it. Decisions can be made at the government level--and in our societies, that is essential. But if those decisions are not supported, if those decisions are not explained by people in positions of responsibility in nongovernmental areas, it is impossible for those decisions to be successful. I learned that early in my career in politics. I always could be more successful in working to find a solution if I had the support not only among politicians but by those people, whether they were in management, in labor, in education, in local government.
But the reason all of you are here is to contribute to a Lee Elder scholarship fund, a fund that is aimed at giving a better education to one or more young people. And as we look around the world today, I think we have to recognize that better education is one way for not only us, individually, but our country and the world to do better in the future. So, I thank all of you who have come here and have contributed, because you are not only paying a tribute to Lee but you are making a good investment in a better America.
As a former member of the board of trustees of one of the participating colleges here, Albion College, I appreciate the important relationship between liberal education and professions and the need to understand that relationship better.
In a free society like our own where education is open to many, not just the few, the university's light, liberty, and learning must not be abstract but rather must relate to reality. A sound liberal education can and should be the key to preparing young people, men and women, for a full life beyond their student years that is, as I see it, at least a creative, productive member of our greater community.
I met this week, earlier this week, with Secretary Weinberger, Dr. Trotter, and Ted Bell. We focused on maximizing available Federal resources to improve opportunities for and the quality of postsecondary education.
In addition, Secretaries Dent, Weinberger, and Brennan are working to build a better relationship and a better balance between the world of work on the one hand and education on the other.
I am hopeful that the National Institute of Education will play an important part, an important part in research and development role in meeting these two important goals. Changing population trends and the emotional aftermath of the turbulent 1960's have contributed to the problems facing liberal education today.
As I understand it, that is what you are doing, developing human and humane insights that only a liberal education provides and applying them to the many professional jobs that must be done in a modern society.
Your basic product and your basic methods of looking at the problem are sound. I believe that the liberal arts college can cope with the change without injuring its roots or its purpose. Your institutions are a much needed part of the modern education system and, of course, of our society.
We in the United States are on the eve of our Bicentennial. One of the things that we are particularly aware of is the prominent role played by men and women of German descent in the building of America over the past two centuries. They have made tremendous contributions in fields as widespread as education and science, culture and the arts.
By the year 2000, I see a people living in a community of peace with other nations, with a standard of living still the highest in the world, with disease greatly conquered, with individual liberties secure for everyone, with wide opportunities for good education and good housing, and with our national will and spirit still climbing as we move toward celebration of our tricentennial.
I can assure you I intend to do so. The Administration will not slice off a small portion of the pie and say, "This is enough for the 25 millions of Americans who are black." We know that many of the serious problems facing Americans-unemployment, unsafe streets, and unequal education--too often press more heavily on blacks and other minorities.
We cannot penalize those who have worked their way up because of their success. I know that you share with me a very deep belief in preserving the upward mobility of our society. In recent years, blacks have made economic and educational gains that must not be wiped out by leaving the middle class out of tax relief.
But more importantly, as I look ahead I know how much. work remains before every child born in America has the same opportunities for long life, economic security, and educational achievement. Much has been done. Much remains. But together we can make that necessary progress.
Thank you very, very much.
I have been told that many of you chose to go without a normal meal, eating only a bowl of rice, to save money to help feed the world's hungry. It is heartwarming to know that students are concerned about others abroad at a time when many here at home are finding it difficult to afford an education or to get a job. Although life is hard for many Americans, I am proud that we continue to share with others. And that, in my opinion, is the measure of genuine compassion. And I congratulate you.
In the same year that I came to Congress, 1949, President Truman advanced Point 4, an innovative, remarkable concept providing technical assistance to developing nations. It brought new American ideas and technology to people hitherto unable to benefit from advances in health, agriculture, and education.
I am particularly concerned about the problem of fair distribution. America believes in equality of opportunity. This Nation provides a showcase of change in providing better nutrition, education, health to more and more people, including those who can least afford it. Now, some nations have made excellent use of our assistance to develop their own capacities. Other governments are still struggling with the issue of equality of opportunity and fair distribution of life's necessities.
But I was well received there, and I had a fine opportunity to present a new concept that we have for higher education. This is another opportunity on the Notre Dame campus to continue that dialog that I hope will not only expand but grow by leaps and bounds between the academic community and the Federal Government.
In the economy and energy and the environment, in housing, in transportation, in education and communication, in social problems and social planning, America has yet to realize its greatest contribution to civilization.
Let us not only be a nation of peace but let us foster peace among all nations. Let us not only believe in equality but live it each day in our lives. Let us not only feed and clothe a healthy America but let us lend a hand to others struggling for self-fulfillment. Let us seek even greater knowledge and offer the enlightenment of our endeavors to the educational and scientific community throughout the world. Let us seek the spiritual enrichment of our people more than material gains. Let us be true to ourselves, to our heritage, and to our homeland, and we will never then be false to any people or to any nation.
For example, the House of Representatives just passed--2 days ago as a matter of fact--its first regular appropriation bill for fiscal year 1976. It amounted to $1 billion more than my request of $6.2 billion for the multitude of federally supported aid-to-education programs. I recommended 6.2 and the House of Representatives added $1 billion to it. Apparently, the American people must educate the Congress.
We must learn more about people, about the development of communities, architecture, engineering, education, motivation, productivity, public health and medicine, arts and sciences, political, legal, and social organization. All of these specialities and many, many more are required if young people like you are to help this Nation develop an agenda for our future--your future, our country's future.
I challenge, for example, the medical students in this audience to put on their agenda the achievement of a cure for cancer. I challenge the engineers in this audience to devise new techniques for developing cheap, clean, and plentiful energy, and as a byproduct, to control floods. I challenge the law students in this audience to find ways to speed the administration of equal justice and make good citizens out of convicted criminals. I challenge education, those of you as education majors, to do real teaching for real life. I challenge the arts majors in this audience to compose the great American symphony, to write the great American novel, and to enrich and inspire our daily lives.
I am glad that Tulane University and other great American educational institutions are reaching out to others in programs to work with developing nations, and I look forward with confidence to your participation in every aspect of America's future.
One reason is inadequate education and a lack of understanding of the free enterprise system, which has produced for all of our citizens the highest standard of living in the history of the world. Because it has worked so well for so long a time, we have tended, unfortunately, to take it for granted. I don't think we can do that any longer. We must make sure not to lose this great legacy of freedom, progress, and prosperity through apathy or indifference or even ignorance. And that is where this department and this man who is about to be sworn in as your new Secretary comes in.
This morning, I would like to take a very few minutes to indicate some of the steps that we're taking, not only to expand the dialog with educators and educational institutions but to point out some of the things that we're trying to do under the current circumstances.
I'm very proud of the fact that the first piece of legislation that I signed upon becoming President was the education amendments act of 1974. This legislation should strengthen our educational system in many, many ways, and it certainly is a commitment to our continued efforts of excellence in education.
If I might interject a personal comment here, I have found that there is a tendency, not just in education but in other areas, to have a repetition of individuals who serve on one commission or another be reappointed or appointed to other groups.
You, I think, know even better than I that there is a great deal of work to be done in the field of education. With declining school enrollments for the past 3 years and the projected declines that we see ahead, it will be vitally important for us to turn our best attention to what might be done to provide employment opportunities for teachers.
In addition, I have supported the bilingual education program and the education of the handicapped program. These are two areas where I think we have to put some special emphasis. Additionally, 25 percent of the revenue sharing funds, according to the statisticians, have been sent to State and local governments and have gone to education either directly or indirectly.
And we're also, in this Administration, putting together our proposals for a new vocational education bill that should strengthen that aspect of our total education system. We've been emphasizing the need to build a stronger working relationship between education on the one hand and the world of work on the other. One of the first speeches I made on becoming President was at Ohio State University--and whenever anybody from Michigan says that, they think of some of those whippings we've taken--[laughter]--but anyhow, that particular theme or thrust is something that I think we have to emphasize, and we will.
And I was pleased to see a new career education law that was passed with the support of this Administration and with the funding of this Administration. Now, you have heard from both John Dunlop and Frank Zarb in their particular fields. Of course, we do have other problems that are of a serious nature-inflation, the recession--but I am confident--and there are some bright clouds beginning to appear--that we can get our economy moving. And once that is done, I hope to take some new and major initiatives in education at the Federal level.
I'm as concerned as you are that we strengthen our education system through a balanced program of local, State, and Federal funding. I was pleased to see the emphasis in the new Elementary and Secondary Education Act on Federal assistance to strengthen State school finance and State equalization programs. I understand that Commissioner Bell is now preparing the guidelines and the standards for the implementation of this program. The new law touches the impact aid formula as well as providing another section to encourage and to support studies of school finance formulas in all 50 States.
In the budget which I submitted to the Congress for fiscal year 1976, for elementary and secondary education purposes we recommended a 50-percent increase over a budget that was submitted in 1969. I know there are people in this group and perhaps others who don't think that's enough. But I think it is helpful to put some of these figures in perspective as we try to find a proper way to adequately fund, at the Federal level, the contribution of the Federal Government to education.
We want to establish closer ties between NEA and my Administration. And if we do have this dialog, this understanding, I think we can strengthen education in all 50 States.
I'm here because I've had the benefit of the friendship of George Shultz. I'm here because I think George Shultz has made a tremendous contribution, over a long period of time, to good government, and obviously, he represents the finest kind of citizenship. Over a period of about 10 years, George has served more than one President in the fields of education, in the fields of labor-management relations, in the area of economics.
Let me reiterate, if I might, and thank you most sincerely for the honor and the pleasure of speaking here today to the graduating class of the University of Pennsylvania, one of America's great educational complexes consisting of 16 institutions of higher learning and personal enlightenment--17 if you include Smokey Joe's. [Laughter]
Franklin's own life was a continuous self-educational process. Practical wisdom was his aim. We find nowhere in his writings the false concept of "completion of education." He saw no limitations to what an individual could learn.
Today, we look back 200 years, not merely to take pride in our history, although we do; not merely to mark the high priority which Americans have always accorded to education and higher learning, although we do. We look back during this Bicentennial to learn some practical lessons for today and tomorrow.
It has been my good fortune in my lifetime to spend a great deal of time in North Carolina--during World War II, in law school, many visits here--one of my sons attended one of your great educational institutions, Wake Forest. And this wonderful personal experience of meeting so many and getting to know so many North Carolinians proves to me that North Carolina is a showcase of a State that reveres the values of the past while leading the way toward a progressive future.
This State, and the rest of the South, knows firsthand the changes of which I speak. And I am proud of the great breakthroughs in education and industry in the South, a region today which numbers some 67 million people, nearly onethird of our total population.
You have so many accomplishments to take pride in. In Southern education, expenditures per pupil have increased by more than 220 percent in the last 25 years--far more than the Nation as a whole. The number of high school graduates has increased at a much greater rate than in the rest of the country. There are significant increases in those attending your wonderful institutions of higher learning.
We are both proud of our independence, yet we recognize the need of working together. Each year marks increasing contacts, increasing cooperation between the Spanish and the American people in a growing number of fields ranging from medicine to urban development, to the arts, to agriculture, to science, and education.
I think it is instructive to recall that this Academy was founded during the Jeffersonian administration. Thomas Jefferson was consistently suspicious of large standing armies and an ardent supporter in his insistence on civilian authority over the military. Nevertheless, Thomas Jefferson was a champion of quality and educational excellence. President Jefferson knew that freedom's defense could not be entrusted to amateurs in a world of expansionist powers and opportunistic pirates. Whatever price our poor and youthful Republic had to pay for its full independence and the protection of its lawful interest, Jefferson and the Congress of his day--and, I might add, the people--were willing to pay.
Your apprenticeship, with its basic education, is ending, but you may be expected to use its lessons at any time. It is an enormous human test, but testing makes men as well as nations stronger and far more confident.
I used to go over there and clean cans and fill cans and get pretty dirty during the process, but I learned a few things that did pay off later as a part of my education in growing up. But at least that was my first exposure to our industrial society, and it was significant to me. And it was a darn good education, as far as I am concerned.
I am also appointing to this group other outstanding members, including representatives of State and local government, labor, education, and consumer interests. But I think Mr. Fielding will well and faithfully carry out your representation.
What we have to use as our objective in the third century is the freedom of the individual--freedom from mass government, freedom from mass industry, freedom from mass education. We want people to be free in our society so that each of you in your own way can develop your personality, your aims, and your ambitions.
Lastly, and just as important as any of the others, we believe in freedom for the individual. Freedom in what way? Freedom against an all-powerful government, freedom against mass education where every individual is educated as a robot, freedom against an impersonal production line, freedom against all of the things that take away from you and me and our neighbors and our friends the opportunity to do something different, because you are different from everybody else.
The NAACP has a very proud record that spans 65 years, with markers of achievement in racial equality unmatched by any other organization. Your coalition of Americans has never been content to stop with one success; you move from one goal of racial progress to the next. As a result, great strides have been made in achieving the goals laid down by the NAACP in 1910: equal rights--particularly voting rights--equal opportunities for justice, for education, for employment.
A policy of fiscal restraint does not mean that this Nation will turn its back on major problems of employment, housing, transportation, health care, and education. In fact, my budget for the fiscal year of 1976, which starts today-it increases the total of these human resources programs by more than $17 billion over fiscal year 1975.
Health is related to many things--good jobs, adequate housing, good education-but no society can achieve good health without an adequate health care system that responds to the needs of people, regardless of where they live or their economic or social station in life.
But now our third century, I believe, should be an era of individual freedom. The mass approach of the modern world places a premium on creativity and individuality. We see mass production, mass education, mass population. They must not smother individual expression or limit individual opportunity. Individualism is a safeguard against the sameness of society. A government too large and bureaucratic can stifle individual initiative by a frustrating statism.
The dignity of the individual is based ultimately on a sense of pride. It does not come from government programs that take over the individual's life and reduce the person to a case file and a claim number. Real aid to the individual is aid that helps the individual to help himself or herself. Federal assistance that helps people achieve higher education and higher qualification is fully justified, because that is the aim and that is the objective.
I am told that one of your graduates here today receiving a degree in education is a 45-year-old woman who worked as a teacher's aide. She aspired to teach. With nine children--one severely handicapped--it was obviously not easy. But her perseverance is typical of this entire graduating class. So is the spirit of your Vietnam veterans and others who caught up to win degrees today.
The Federal Government can provide financial aid to education, but it cannot give individuals the determination that you have displayed in earning your degrees.
But I am concerned about the future of some other young Americans who are today neither in school nor working at jobs. Tragically, they are on the streets. Some have lost hope and motivation to the extent that they no longer are even looking for work or education. Some, tragically, have police records.
So, I challenge today's graduates to use your new skills to help the people who are not in this hall today. You are uniquely equipped. I challenge the graduates in education to teach young people how to read and how to write. I challenge the graduates in the liberal arts to stimulate the mind and to inspire the spirit. I challenge the graduates in corrections and law enforcement to counsel and to motivate individuals from the path or paths of destruction of themselves and others. I challenge the business and administration graduates to conceive of new jobs that are more interesting, challenging, and rewarding. I challenge all graduates to set an example that gives hope to the millions who have not yet made it.
I agree with the CSU philosophy. You kill pride if students are passed merely because they come from disadvantaged backgrounds. That is no favor. It is a disservice. You sacrifice for an education, and consequently, you are entitled to a fair chance to learn. CSU is not a school where the student can coast blithefully through for 4 years and emerge with a degree but without competence.
The judiciary is the Nation's standing army in defense of individual freedom, but all segments of our society--government, business, labor, and education-must work to see that the individual is not stifled.
Now in the third, the challenge, as I see it, is to advance individual independence. If we don't do something in this third century to protect the individual against mass education, mass government, mass labor, where the rights of the individual are lost because of the totality of the effort--the individual has to be given his unique opportunity to participate and not get lost in the crowd.
ALPHA TRIVETTE [national president, Future Farmers of America]. Mr. President, I am sure we all remember and hold very fond memories of the meeting we had with you in Kansas City. And it's hard for us to conceive the real impact of your being with us and visiting with us on that night had for all vocational education, more specifically, the FFA and the industry of agriculture.
But you, because of your better education, better opportunities, and all the other things that bless us in this country, can take what we built and make it the kind of America that we dream about and hope for. And that is the message I would like to leave with you from the Rose Garden and the White House.
I am today returning without my approval H.R. 5901, the education appropriation act, 1976.
Throughout my public life, I have believed--and still believe--that education is one of the strong foundation stones of our Republic. But that is not the issue in this appropriation bill.
Actually, it is my second visit here as President. I was here nearly a year ago-less than 2 weeks after I was sworn in--to sign the Education Amendments of 1974, in keeping with my personal philosophy favoring appropriate Federal assistance to education.
It has a staff of more than 128,000 men and women. The decisions and actions of this vital department of our Government affect the lives of every man, woman, and child in the United States. HEW has a major influence on the education Americans receive, on their health care, and on the entire range of social services.
THE PRESIDENT. I think we have tried, but I must confess that we haven't been as successful as we should have. And the best evidence of a lack of a successful education program is that Congress doesn't comprehend the problem we are in. [Laughter]
A career in the military today, in my judgment, is a very promising one with all the benefits educationally, et cetera, that are available. I think it is regrettable if the situation does exist that young people today don't look at the military with admiration, because they should.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me be very frank here. I don't think that forced busing to achieve racial balance is the proper way to get quality education. The principal objective is to get quality education for all our young people. And I think there must be a better way to do it than the way some advocate.
Now, we will carry out whatever the law is and however the courts interpret it. Don't get me wrong. But it is my personal conviction and has been for 10 or 15 years that there is a better way to get quality education for all of our young people than the way some advocate.
THE PRESIDENT. And if I might add, I happen to think that the public school systems, whether they are primary, secondary, or higher education, are made better when they have got competition from nonpublic schools--whether it is college, higher education, elementary, or secondary. We want a competitive education system in this country. It is good for everybody.
I can tell you this, however, that I think the record of this Administration in supporting education, including vocational education, is a good one.
As a matter of fact, in the education recommendations in the budget for fiscal 1976, which is the year that began this July, there is a considerable amount more in funding recommended than in the previous fiscal year.
I am concerned about education, but in the multitude of requests for money that come from a tremendous number of good causes, and the availability of our country's resources in taxes or in borrowing, somebody--and unfortunately in my case it is me--I have to somehow weave in the proper relationship and the proper priorities.
But I can tell you from my own personal history in the Congress and otherwise, we will do as well as we possibly can for vocational education.
Today, you have heard about agriculture from Earl [Butz], about the economy from John Dunlop--John Dunlop and Bill Seidman--and about energy from Frank Zarb, about education from Commissioner Bell, and about the environment from Russ Train.
But just as importantly, we have also heard from you, from the men and women representing nearly every facet of life in the Peoria area. And I thank all of you--labor, business, industry, education, farming, the minority community, women's groups, the press, and the legal profession. I am grateful that you participated.
This wonderful independent voter wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family at prices he can afford, and so do we as Republicans.
I am not satisfied, but between the educational opportunities under the GI bill and the other efforts that have been made, the GI from the Vietnam war is, I think, doing as well as we possibly can, looking at the overall economic circumstances we face.
Your recent veto of the education bill was accompanied by a statement that you supported educational funding, but that national economic and budget conditions precluded your acceptance of the size of the appropriations being recommended by Congress.
My question is: In light of your directives to Federal agencies to solve the problem between educational needs and adequate funding--this question is two-fold--has your Administration examined new funding policies, that would it be possible? Secondly, is it likely that the Federal Government once again will study broader entitlement programs such as voucher systems in an attempt to expand equality of access to education at all levels?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me say, Father Raynor, that if I recall precisely the budget that I submitted for education, primary as well as secondary, and higher education for fiscal 1976, it was a higher figure overall, in each case above the corresponding figure for the preceding year, is that correct? I am almost certain that is correct.
Now, that may not be enough in the minds of the prospective beneficiaries, but I think it does show a recognition that we know you have had higher costs, at either the higher education level or the primary and secondary level.
The veto is a constitutional authority given to a President. It is not a negative, it is an affirmative authority. In every instance where there has been a veto sustained, we have had further negotiation with the Congress, and the net result has been a reasonable compromise. And I think we can do the same thing in the field of education.
Now, on the latter question, I am a firm believer that the public educational system educates children better if they have competition from nonpublic schools, whether they are Catholic, whether they are Lutheran, whether they are Jewish, whether they are Christian Reform in the Dutch background that I had over in Michigan. Competition in education makes better education for all children.
Furthermore, the Department of Labor's modest family budget without higher education requires about $14,000 annually. This means that the Federal aid programs discriminate against middle-income families, including both blue collar and white collar workers. Is your Administration aware of this problem? If so, what program changes are contemplated?
But let me add one thing. We have had these loan programs to students in higher education for a number of years. It is awfully disappointing to see the very poor repayment schedule of a lot of the students. I looked at the figures the other day, and you get some variation, but as I recall, it is somewhere between 25 and 10 percent--how you judge it.
The basic thing that everyone is trying to do is to provide quality education. There is a difference of opinion on how you achieve quality education. My personal view is that forced busing by courts is not the way to achieve quality education. I think there is a better way.
We have had court-ordered forced busing in a number of communities. There are studies that indicate that it has not provided quality education for the young people, which is our personal concern.
There were five other proposals that courts could have followed, guidelines that the courts should have followed, and I think we would have avoided a lot of this conflict. That is one way I think we could have solved the problem. The other is the utilization of Federal funds to upgrade school buildings, provide better teacher-pupil ratios, to provide better equipment. That is the way, in my opinion, we achieve what we all want, which is quality education. I just don't think court-ordered forced busing is the way to achieve quality education. I think there are better ways.
Now, the education bill. The education bill that I submitted in January for the budget that started July 1 had more money in it for education than any other year in recent years. We increased it over previous years. Again, the Congress loaded it up with some programs that I think can't be justified if you are going to have any fiscal responsibility. I hope the Congress sustains that veto, because there is a lot of nonessential spending in it. Now, having vetoed that bill, there was nothing in there, in that proposal Congress passed, to do anything more in desegregation cases than I recommended. So, that is a moot issue as far as the Boston case is concerned.
We have mass education. We have mass industry. We have mass government. We have mass communication. I think the American people, whether they are in Rhode Island or Michigan or California or Florida or Alaska or Hawaii--I don't care where they come from--they want their individuality preserved and expanded. They don't want to be subjected to massive anything. They want to believe in their family and themselves, and that should be our objective in the third century of America's history.
It is my judgment, in the third century of America's greatness--and I go back to what I said at the outset--the American people still want their individual liberty, and they are going to fight for it. They are going to demand it. They aren't going to be overwhelmed by big government, big labor, big business, big education, massive communication.
He wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family--and at prices that he can afford.
In Edith Green's area of outstanding expertise--education--I don't think there was a Member of the House or Senate, Democrat or Republican, who was more knowledgeable and more articulate than she with ideas and, I think, thoughts, programs that would have been so important for education. And I thank you again for being here, Edith.
The independent voter wants a good education, good housing, good health care, and good food for his family at prices that he can afford. We as Republicans have an identical view.
How can cold statistics ever adequately portray the trauma of lost jobs, lost savings, and lost pride? America's greatest national resource is her people, and I intend to see that that resource is not endangered.
One of the prime goals of my Administration is to get America out of neutral and moving ahead in a pattern of sustained growth. A working American is a buying American, an investing American, a saving American. Unemployment checks are to maintain life. Paychecks are to enrich life. No American can successfully engage in the pursuit of happiness until the needs of adequate food, clothing, shelter, education, and employment are met.
Note: The President spoke at 8:50 a.m. at the Community Convention Center. The annual breakfast was sponsored by the Host Committee, in conjunction with the California Chamber of Commerce, for leaders in California government, business, finance, education, agriculture, and labor.

Since California is almost a model of the whole United States--in its diversity of industry and agriculture, its urban and rural interests, its internal and international trade and commerce, its steady growth and the attendant challenges in transportation, education, employment, and human needs--almost any national problem would be an appropriate one to discuss in California context. Any subject that is of major importance to Californians is also of deep concern to all Americans.
We should get away from the concept that the individual should be mass educated, that he should be controlled by a big government. The individual ought to have the right of expression on his own. And I can assure you that as far as this Administration is concerned, we are going to promote the right of the individual to be free from big government, big education, big labor, big business, and the like.
We believe that the freedom of the individual is important, that each of you should not be overcrowded by the Federal Government of certain rights, whether they are in education, in industry, in your community. The right of each of you as an individual is a sacred trust to us.
The black church saw the need to concentrate early on education. Let me add that the issue in 1837, when Cheyney State College was founded in Pennsylvania as the first black institution of higher learning, was quality education. The need today is still quality education. I assure you here today that I stand for quality education for every American. Not one single child in this country is excluded. With reason, with calm, with sincerity and some prayers from all of us, we will master these trials and tribulations and become a greater nation because of them.
And then I think it is important that we make a special effort to make certain and to make positive that individuals have a growth of freedom rather than the heavy hand of government.
The third century of our country ought to emphasize the freedom of the individual. We are all different. We shouldn't have mass education. We shouldn't have mass government. We shouldn't have mass labor unions. We shouldn't have ourselves computerized according to what some machine says.
THE PRESIDENT. I think we have to decide in the first place what we are really trying to do by busing before you discuss whether it is good or bad. All of us-white, black, every American, in my opinion--wants quality education.
Now, the Court decided in 1954 that separate but equal schools were unconstitutional, and the courts have decided that busing is one way to try and desegregate on the one hand and perhaps improve education on the other.
But then I think I have the right to give what I think is a better answer to the achievement of quality education, which is what we all seek. And there is always more than one answer. I think that quality education can be enhanced by better school facilities, lower pupil-teacher ratios, the improvement of the neighborhood, as such. Those are better answers, in my judgment, than busing under a court order.
Quality education can be achieved by more than one method. I was reading in the Washington Post this morning a column by one of the outstanding black columnists, Mr. Raspberry. And Mr. Raspberry has come to the conclusion that court-ordered forced busing is not the way to achieve quality education for blacks or whites in a major metropolitan area. That is a very significant decision by Mr. Raspberry, who I think Mr. Dudman, for example, highly respects.
THE PRESIDENT. So far there has been a minimum of local disorder. I hope that that attitude can prevail in the months ahead as the police involvement and the Federal marshal involvement becomes less and less. I am always an optimist, even though I disagree with the method by which they are trying to achieve quality education.
THE PRESIDENT. I am glad that you put the emphasis where I think it belongs--namely, quality education. Quality education under the method utilized by the courts is aimed at forced school busing. That, of course, came out of the 1954 Supreme Court decision.
I firmly say without any hesitation or qualification that if the court says something has to be done, it will be done, as far as this Administration is concerned. No question about that. On the other hand, it is my judgment that there is a better way of achieving quality education for all schoolchildren than by the court method.
It is most interesting. A very able black newspaper columnist by the name of William Raspberry, in the Washington Post this morning, said that courtordered, forced busing was not achieving quality education. I wholeheartedly agree with him.
Now, what can be a better way to do it? I believe that you can improve the facilities in many of the disadvantaged areas. Too often school boards have neglected some of the plant and equipment in those areas. We should increase the pupil-teacher ratio. I think that would be helpful in upgrading the educational opportunities of young people so they can achieve a quality education.
I believe that the emergency school aid program which Congress approved roughly 5 or 6 years ago--it is about a billion and a half a year; no, it is not quite that much but it is a sizable amount--can be focused in on places like Boston, as Secretary Mathews has done, or in Louisville, where we are having our current problems, to try and get better faculty, better facilities, better equipment. In my honest opinion, that is a preferable way to achieve the objective of quality education without tearing apart some of the social fabric in some of these communities.
THE PRESIDENT. We have a number of higher education programs. The GI bill that was originated after World War II is in full operation now and is continuing even though those who are in the military today are not in combat. And that was the general basis upon which the GI bill was initially passed at the time of World War II and at the time of Korea. We spend roughly $1 billion to $1.5 billion a year on that program at the present time.
In addition, we have a number of educational programs that are aimed at helping young people who want to go to college and do not have the financial means to do so. We have a loan guarantee program with any loaning institution. We have Basic Educational Opportunities--it's BEOG, or whatever the combination is. And there is another one--I can't recall the name--but the total amount available in these several programs is about a billion dollars a year. So, there is really no reason today why no young person who wants to go to college can't get Federal financial assistance of a substantial amount. It won't cover the whole thing, but it will cover a very substantial amount.
THE PRESIDENT. It is my best recollection that in the traditional vocational education program there has been a gradual increase. If my memory is accurate, it is about $300 million a year. Is that roughly right? Well, I can tell you that it has been on an increasing scale, and I think that figure is roughly right.
Now, in addition to the traditional vocational education programs, we have what is called CETA--Comprehensive Educational Training Act, CETA--and it has been funded this year at a figure of $3,200 million. Included in that program was $450 million for the summer job training program for young people, which was very helpful. It had some aspects of vocational education.
The remainder of the CETA program is aimed at vocational training primarily for those people who are out of work of one occupation and seeking employment in another occupation. So, roughly $2 1/2 billion is available in that aspect of the program plus the traditional high school and vocational education program.
Now, that is a lot of money--I think it has generally done a good job. But what has bothered me about some of the vocational educational programs and some of the CETA training programs is that we have a training program that doesn't necessarily relate to an occupational area where there are job opportunities.
I know from my old experience in the Congress that we used to establish-not we, but the department--job training programs, and then all of a sudden when the program ended there were no. job opportunities in that particular employment field. I think there has to be a better coordination in finding out where the job opportunities are, the shortages exist, and then train people for those shortages rather than just train them for an occupation where there are no job opportunities. I think we can do a better job spending that much money in this aspect of vocational education.
Take the education bill that I vetoed. This last week the Congress overrode it 300-and-something to 30 or 40 in the House, and in the Senate it was 70-something to 12. That single education bill will add $350 million to spending in this year and $800 million next year over and above what I recommended, and I recommended more for this year than was made available last year.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe our theme for the Bicentennial should be the rights of the individual operating within the law. I think the individual in the third century of our country should be free of mass education, mass industry, mass government. I think the right of the individual operating within the law without the heavy hand of government or any of the other massive organizations running him, if we can achieve that, I think it will accomplish what you are seeking to accomplish.
Let me add at this point, if I might, a matter of deep concern to me, a matter that I am positive is of deep concern to all those here and 214 million Americans. We have tried hard, we have written laws, we have appropriated money to accomplish quality education for the young in America. In 1954 the courts of this country decided that one way, in their estimation, to achieve that was court-ordered forced busing. Now, regardless of how we individually may feel, the law of the land must be upheld.
But if I could give you a view that I have expressed, not just recently but for 10 or more years, there is a better way to achieve quality education in America than by forced busing. We can and we will find a better way.
As we approach our third century, I see this era as one of the fulfillment of the individual citizen. I see a century devoted to education, which equips young men and women, like the students of SMU, to make their own decisions rather than permit their future to be programmed by massive government structures that an imaginative writer foresaw for 1984--a nightmarish fantasy of what our third century could be.
I place a high premium on creativity, originality, and your right to differentiate yourself from the mass. Today's mounting danger is from mass government, mass education, and mass technology, and we must not let them prevail.
I am especially proud of the role of free education in preserving individuality. Education is vital to my vision of our third century. Only education can equip individuals to take responsibility for their own lives in the face of pressures of mass systems of society. Education must provide the perception upon which rests the quality of individuality.
This generation bears a very special task--the preservation of individualism. You are the bulwark of individualism. So is your family. So is your local community and, especially, schools like Southern Methodist University, which join the public educational institutions in cross-germination of ideas.
My own background included two experiences in higher education: one, the University of Michigan, the other Yale University; one public, the other private. I value both. I buy an open market for ideas.
Education is the key to diversity which will determine the kind of people we will be. It must not become a mass product. All the armies, weapons systems of our defense will mean absolutely nothing without self-reliant individuals who retain the cherished qualities of Americanism. That is one great purpose of education.
But that growth can be nourished. On the portico of Angell Hall on my old campus at Ann Arbor, there is an inscription from an act of Congress, adopted in 1787--the Northwest Ordinance Act--which states: "Religion, morality, [and] knowledge, being necessary to good government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education shall forever be encouraged."
Let us apply the theories of education in the laboratory of life. I urge students and graduates and faculties to direct their genius, their energy to the solution of the problems facing America. I challenge you to help make not only America but American life beautiful, inspiring. You can do it.
In private education there is a direct citizen participation in the educational process. SMU is not dependent on government funding that establishes a rigid requirement or rigid guidelines. To maintain its very unique qualities, Southern Methodist University takes responsibility for its own support. And I commend its supporters, and you should all be most thankful for them.
I am concerned about the very heavy burden falling upon the working, middle-class citizens who are struggling to pay tuition and costs at both public and private colleges. I am also concerned that private higher education is now in financial difficulty.
Private institutions provide a leavening and stimulating influence for the public universities and the public colleges. Their continuing strength and vitality are essential to higher education. We must help to keep this competition going between the private as well as the public colleges and universities. Educators must innovate and respond to the world in which students of all ages and all backgrounds find themselves.
They must offer something truly different, truly important. Private education, free of government constraints, enjoys boundless freedom to experiment in vital areas that may fall outside general public support.
I have the deepest confidence in America's future and our educational resources. The schools of this Nation--private as well as public--can help to inspire the lives of Americans with new meaning and with new quality. Both private and public educators must combine their genius in preparing men and women for our challenges of the third century.
THE PRESIDENT. I look upon my efforts here as part of the responsibility that I have as President to talk to groups in the education field, in the labor field, in other areas--and I also feel it is a part of my responsibility on this trip to help the party per se, to help get the party strengthened in the responsibility it has for organization as well as fundraising. There is nothing in this trip that relates to my candidacy as such.
I have been opposed to busing as a means of achieving quality education from its inception. My record in the Congress in voting for civil rights legislation is a good one. So, I believe that the real issue is quality education. It can be achieved better for disadvantaged people, minorities, by other means.
But I have, of course, had an opportunity to look into what Pepperdine stands for. It stands for excellence in education and anything that is related to excellence-whether it is in the arts or in athletics, in business, professions, I wholeheartedly support--and Pepperdine, in the field of education, does represent that high standard.
Pepperdine University is a symbol itself. It is an outstanding example of those voluntarily supported institutions which have contributed so much to America's greatness and to our country's progress. Such great universities as Paris, Oxford, and Padua--dating back to the Middle Ages--have a rich heritage as institutions of independent education. America proudly celebrates its 200th birthday next year, but we would have to reach back still another century to mark the founding of Harvard College in Massachusetts Bay Colony, or William and Mary in Virginia, or St. John's College in Maryland. Thirteen other great American universities were founded before the American Revolution, and all share in the distinguished traditions of private higher education.
My own background, as Dr. Banowsky indicated, included two experiences in higher education: one at the University of Michigan and the other at Yale University Law School; one public, the other private.
I value what I learned from both, and I am all for an open marketplace for ideas and learning experiences. Private institutions both complement on the one hand, and compete on the other, with public education in America. Millions of Americans have enjoyed the diversity of benefits this dual system has produced.
They have enrolled, for example, a higher percentage of black students than any public sector of higher education in this State. Further, independent 4-year colleges rank very high in the percentage of Mexican-Americans enrolled, and they provide more students with more scholarships than any public segment of California education.
They have proven this point, which we should emphasize: They have proven by their own example that the road to quality higher education need not be a narrow one traveled only by a select few.
As Aristotle said centuries ago, "All who have meditated on the art of governing mankind have been convinced that the fate of political communities depends on the education of youth."
But today one segment of America's educational capacity is in serious trouble. The institutions of private education in the United States are being battered and buffeted in ways that may ultimately jeopardize their survival.
We should remember and never forget that the term "private education" is misleading, because these institutions, though privately endowed, serve important public functions, and at a great savings to the American taxpayer. We should remember that this is something that is too often forgotten. California, for example, now counts about 100 independent colleges and universities within its great borders. It is estimated that these institutions carry 30 percent of the State's postsecondary education workload. Each year they provide, with almost no cost to the taxpayer, more than $1 billion in educational research and related services in California alone.
In return, these institutions and their students received less than 3 percent of the total State funds spent for higher education in California. It is through the support of alumni and friends such as Leonard Firestone, Margaret Martin Brock, Frank Seaver, and so many others who have helped Pepperdine build this magnificent campus, that independent education survives and grows in California and throughout the United States. And we thank them all for it.
In recent years the Congress has considered a number of proposals which would discourage private charitable contributions to these institutions. Fortunately, most have been rejected thus far. But there is a certain persistence in these proposals which must be constantly monitored and rebuffed. Today, let me repeat what I have said to many educators who have visited me in Washington: I approve, support, and encourage the principle of voluntary giving to help finance higher education. And I will oppose any legislative proposals which discourage such support, including those which would limit charitable tax deductions, disallow the full value of appreciated assets, or exclude the State tax deductions.
Unemployment checks are designed simply to maintain life. Paychecks are to enrich life, to provide not only its necessities but some of its luxuries. No American can successfully engage in the pursuit of happiness until the basic needs--food, clothing, shelter, education, and employment--are first met.
Now, education is only one facet of this crisis. It also goes into the other social systems--transportation, communications, recreation within the cities. I don't recall hearing any programs recently by this Administration, the past Administration, about reversing this--what I would term a spiral downward of our big cities--to correct that problem. Because if we don't correct the problem in the near future, killing the cities will thereby lead to a worsening of life in the United States, if you want to use a broader term.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there are a number of Federal educational programs that are aimed at helping local communities in a very broad sense. But the one that is aimed specifically at meeting the problem of those communities that are under court order or under HEW administrative requirement for the current fiscal year--if my recollection is accurate--it is about $250 million.
Today's dedication of this impressive new home for the Law School is certainly no tie; it is one more victory in Stanford's unbroken record of educational excellence. The dream of Senator and Mrs. Stanford that children of California should be their children, with the help of many who followed their generous example, has broadened to the benefit of its young men and young women of all America and the world.
There were more colleges and universities in the Thirteen Colonies before the American Revolution than in all of England, Scotland, and Ireland put together. As Americans moved westward, they set aside lands for the higher training of teachers, engineers, agriculturalists, scientists, doctors, lawyers, and other professions. They encouraged the support of both private and public institutions of learning in State and Federal tax policies. No nation, at any time, has put a higher priority on education for all of its citizens.
These pressures close in upon us from many, many quarters--massive government, massive management, massive labor, massive education, massive communication, and massive acquisition of information.
We have increased our funding, for example, in a wide spectrum--education, unemployment compensation, the whole area of human assistance. We have recommended in the budget for the current fiscal year more money than any administration in the history of the United States for social programs.
So, what we have got to do is solve the energy problem, solve the problem of our economy, and in this third century that we are all looking forward to, the third century of our great country, is to free us as individuals from the octopus kind of society that has tended to develop--mass government, mass education, mass industry, mass labor.
Mr. President, I think all of us are impressed with your response to John Kenefick's question about helping in the regulatory end of the business community. We have similar problems in the educational community. We did a survey at our institution a few days ago and were shocked to discover that by what we think is a conservative estimate, we are spending between $200,000 and $250,000 a year in manpower in filling out Federal forms and reports.
While we recognize there must be some surveillance from the Federal partner in education, we wonder if it might not be in the interest of efficiency and the educational community and good government to give some consideration to, not in the spirit of proliferation, but in the spirit of consolidation, consider the creation of a separate department of education to deal with our problems?
At this point, I am not convinced there ought to be a split-up, taking education out from health and welfare, but as time goes on, I don't think we should just hold on to something because it was good when it was started 20 years ago. But for the moment, I wouldn't go any further than to say we will take a look at it, and we will reserve the judgment until the survey comes in.
In the meantime, we do have programs such as the summer youth program where I recommended and Congress approved roughly $450 million for this past summer to give jobs to the youth of America who were unemployed.
We have a number of manpower training programs that seek to train an individual for a specific job in industry or in the service area. We have a number of programs that help particularly the less well off continue in the field of higher education. I am sure you would agree with me that the better educated minorities are, the better prospects they have for better jobs.
So, we have to get more of them into the mainstream of higher education, and we are making headway there. Those are the kind of programs that I think, maybe not tomorrow, but in the relatively long circumstances, will provide better jobs and more meaningful jobs than the circumstances are today.
THE PRESIDENT. It is my understanding or reaction that in the vocational education program overall, in recent weeks or months there has been an order issued that permits the Future Farmers of America and five other comparable organizations as active participants in organizations that will get financial assistance in the handling of vocational education.
In order to continue to do this at this rate, it is absolutely essential that we continue to receive Federal support either directly to the institution or in the form of Federal dollars available for student loans. Recently the Federal support of medical and dental education has tended to trail off. My question to you, Mr. President, is: What position will you take in regard to current Federal legislation which is being designed to support medical and dental education?
THE PRESIDENT. To some extent, I may have answered that question earlier. I think it is an educational process, and the sooner we start, the better, with the youth of America. They really have a bigger stake in the future of this country than some of us older folks.
We should continue to work at improving the situation, and we can through the educational process. I don't have a pat formula, but I sure have faith that it will happen.
If I might add just a note on that point, one of the great, great strengths of our political system is the fact that we can have differences. And as a former great Speaker of the House of Representatives once said, "We can disagree without being disagreeable." In America we can make our system better by competition in the political arena, as we make our system better by competition, whether it is on an athletic field, whether it is in business or in the professions or in education.
THE PRESIDENT. I am not familiar with any fluctuations from the budget point of view. It may vary or fluctuate at the institutional level, but if I recall accurately, there has been no variation of any significance in the total amount that is made available by the Federal Government to institutions of higher learning. And speaking of the student loans, student grants, all of those programs, I know that amount has been going upward at a rather steady rate, and of course, the educational benefits that go under the GI bill have likewise been increasing at a substantial rate.
There are, of course, other efforts that are being made in the field of education. One of the problems is making sure that minorities are adequately educated so. they can handle some of the jobs where there are openings, and we are seeking to make special efforts in those areas.
My question, Mr. President, is this: What is being done to make sure that one part of the Government works with the other? When we try to get a doctor to move into our community, we hear that he won't come because of the problems of housing and education. Teachers will not come because of the problems of housing and health care. Who is going to help us put together the answers to these different parts of the same problem?
There was a program in education--I think it is still in effect--that gives loans or grants to those seeking to teach, providing they spend x number of years in the educational field, and they would get a forgiveness for the loan or grant that was given to them. I think that is still in effect, is it not, John or Bill?--the Teacher Corps program, which is aimed at meeting that particular problem. I recognize fully that you need doctors and teachers, and I believe those two programs at least in part can be helpful.
Now, that is at the Federal level. It does not have a corresponding group, necessarily, at the State level, but in those areas where it makes sense geographically, I would hope that we would not be hidebound by arbitrary State lines, and to the extent in the areas of health and education where it makes sense, we would proceed with the establishment of regional or other geographical organizations to meet a practical problem. I don't think we should be circumscribed by just arbitrary State lines if another approach is the better one.
I think there is a better answer to quality education. And this problem in Louisville at the present time has created some local disturbances, and rather than involve any potential injury to anybody else and for other security reasons, I have decided to cancel the trip.
We should make our third century the century of individual freedom--freedom from mass government, freedom from mass education, freedom from mass industry, freedom from mass unions, freedom for each and every one of us. We don't want to be a computer; we want to be individuals as we grow and mature and express our views and act by ourselves. And that ought to be the objective of our third century--individual freedom.
They allege that this is the way that the courts ought to achieve quality education. I strongly, vehemently disagree with the Court's decision, based on the Constitution, as the best way to achieve quality education. I have had that view for 10 years or more.
Now, until the courts decide that there is a better way to achieve quality education under their interpretation of the Constitution, there is nothing that a President can do, there is nothing that the Congress can do, except what the Congress did a year ago under the leadership of Congressman Marv Esch, who introduced an amendment in the House of Representatives, which was passed and approved in both the House and the Senate, which listed seven or eight steps to achieve the constitutional handling of how to achieve quality education, and the last of that criteria was busing.
Unfortunately, few courts, few Federal courts, have followed the guidelines of the Esch amendment. I wish they would. But until the Court either uses that criteria or changes their way in which they want to constitutionally achieve quality education, there is nothing a President can do, and not much more that a Member of the House or Senate can do.
If I might reminisce just a moment--this is early fall in the great State of Connecticut--it hardly seems possible that about 40 years ago, I came from the State of Michigan in August of 1935 and spent the next 5-plus years in New Haven, working for one of the finest people that I have ever known. He gave me my first job and was tremendously influential in helping to guide me in how to handle the job. But more importantly he gave me the opportunity not only to have a job but to further my education. For that wonderful opportunity to me, I want to thank, before all of you, a very old and very dear friend of mine, Ducky Pond of Yale University.
THE PRESIDENT. Really, I have spoken out consistently and for some time on this problem. I was one of the original Members of the House or the Senate that said that court-ordered forced busing to achieve racial balance was not the way to accomplish quality education.
That has been a consistent statement, view, policy of mine for a number of years. I believe it even more fervently today than I did before. So, we have to start out with the assumption that education, quality education, is what we are all seeking to accomplish.
Dr. Coleman,3 who testified before the Senate Committee on Judiciary just a few days ago--he had some thoughts on it. And it is interesting that Dr. Coleman, who was an initial proponent on busing to achieve quality education, has now--after studying the problem in a number of cities--come to the conclusion that it is not the answer.
Only a short 25 years from now, I see America, whose citizens reside in a community of peace with other nations; share the still highest standard of living in the world; live longer because killer diseases have been conquered and the quality of life enhanced; and enjoy opportunities and housing and education and jobs limited only by their personal initiatives and long-range objectives; experience individual liberties and freedoms which have not only been secured but expanded; whose citizens share a national will and spirit which is still climbing as this Nation moves well into its third century.
Under the enlightened leadership of my dear friend and your Governor, Arch Moore, you have vastly--under the leadership of Arch, you have vastly improved your highway system, raised the quality of education at every level, built tourism into a $600-million-a-year business, and conducted a highly successful drive for new industries that has paid off in thousands and thousands of jobs and an unemployment rate below the national average.
In the first 100 years of America, this kind of government was put together firmly and soundly. In our second century of America, we moved forward into the greatest industrial Nation in the history of mankind. Now, in the third century, we are moving into a new era and a new opportunity, an opportunity to give to the individual the kind of freedom that is so needed, so necessary, so vital, that so many want: freedom from mass government, freedom from mass labor, freedom from mass industry, freedom from mass education.
You have the opportunity here at NCCU to break more shackles and join in America's competitive life through a good education. Seize the opportunity and use that wonderful opportunity and the experiences here. It may never pass your way again.
Last year we were pleased to receive and to welcome nearly 54,000 Asian students to the United States, while thousands upon thousands of American students went to Asian countries. I applaud your contribution to partnership in education. Your efforts represent America's vision of an open world of understanding, freedom, and peace.
I was thinking this morning about the NEA. I have had a lot of contact with the MEA in Michigan, of course, and it is a very fine organization. I feel very strongly that we are fortunate in this country, some 200 years, of having adopted almost from the very outset a universal education. And we are the beneficiaries, you and myself along with millions of others, of that concept. I think it is something we have to maintain and expand. I believe it is good for the students. I think it is good for teachers. I think it is good for the country.
As you recall, the year 1975 opened with rancor and with bitterness. Political misdeeds of the past had neither been forgotten nor forgiven. The longest, most divisive war in our history was winding toward an unhappy conclusion. Many feared that the end of that foreign war of men and machines meant the beginning of a domestic war of recrimination and reprisal. Friends and adversaries abroad were asking whether America had lost its nerve. Finally, our economy was ravaged by inflation--inflation that was plunging us into the worse recession in four decades. At the same time, Americans became increasingly alienated from big institutions. They were steadily losing confidence, not just in big government but in big business, big labor, and big education, among others. Ours was a troubled land.
Including my health care program reforms, I propose to consolidate some 59 separate Federal programs and provide flexible Federal dollar grants to help States, cities, and local agencies in such important areas as education, child nutrition, and social services. This flexible system will do the job better and do it closer to home.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me take each of the consolidations. In the case of education, which includes elementary and secondary education, which includes vocational education, aid to the handicapped and libraries, the figure for fiscal 1977 is $3,300 million. We have added a sweetener of $150 million, so there is no cutback, none whatsoever, in the Federal aid to education. It is an increase rather than a cutback.
We simply are emphasizing with this approach a better delivery system of the services, whether it is health, social services, education, or child nutrition.
I am not going to give up on properly elected officials at the State and local level. I think they do a good job. And all we are doing is giving them money to carry out the kind of programs. And the programs in education may be different in Florida from those in Maine. The programs in the field of health may be different in South Carolina than they are in Alaska.
3 The President was referring to diagrams for the health services, education, and food and nutrition programs of the Federal Government.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, as I recall, the percentage of money spent on education nationwide by the Federal Government is a relatively small part of it. And, actually, in our education program we are recommending $150 million more. So, we are adding to the pot as far as the Federal Government is concerned.
I will ask Secretary Mathews to give you a more complete answer, but the Federal contribution to education is a relatively small part of the total that is Spent by States and local communities for education. So, the switch here I don't think is significant, particularly when the Federal Government has the total responsibility for our national security. And that is our prime obligation in this Complicated world in which we live.
David.
THE PRESIDENT. I do not think it is needed and necessary to divide the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The enactment of the necessary legislation to move to the block grants in health, child nutrition, social services, and education will relieve very substantially Secretary Mathews' administrative problems. As you can well see from the chart, if we were able to do that, which I hope we can, I see absolutely no need and necessity for tearing apart the Department of HEW.
THE PRESIDENT. I firmly believe in the all-volunteer military force. I believe that the experience in the last 3 years has been good. All of the services have been able to recruit all of the manpower they needed. They have been able to increase the educational requirements and still get all of the manpower that they wanted in a voluntary way. So, I strongly believe in an all-voluntary military force, a career force. And the experience in the last several years has been very encouraging. And I think we ought to continue it.
We have also recommended the full funding of the comprehensive education training program--I think that is around $1,600 million--to get people who are unemployed to be trained for subsequent employment. Those are good programs.
Now I would like to say a word or two about four other programs that we are seeking to consolidate so that at the local level you can do a better job of delivering the services--health, education, social services, child nutrition.
Now, we have the same problem in primary, elementary, and secondary education. The chart looks as bad, if not worse. And what we have recommended in the case of education is the consolidation of--I think there are 27 programs in this area. So, you can imagine it looks much worse than this one with only 15, and we are recommending $3,300 million with $150 million bonus so that nobody can say that we weren't responsive. But nobody can defend that kind of a system.
A far better job can be done in the providing of those services, in the delivery of those services if the Federal Government makes available the money but gives the responsibility to the locally elected officials. And this is what we have tried to do in the budget that I proposed for the consolidation of Federal health programs, Federal aid and assistance to primary and secondary education, Federal assistance in the social services area.
We have also made some recommendations for a better delivery of Federal services, and I speak here of the Federal investment in health, the Federal investment in education, the Federal investment in child nutrition, and the Federal investment in social services.
Now, what we have tried to do is to consolidate a wide range of categorical grant programs--15 in health, 27 in education, roughly 15 in child nutrition-and avoid the duplication and the overlapping that exists in the present categorical grant program. We recommend virtually the same amount of money in the health, education, and social services. In fact, we actually recommend more money. In the case of child nutrition we made some reductions because we found that at the present time, under the existing system, money was going to families where they were above the poverty line and families were being shortchanged in many instances below the poverty line.
THE PRESIDENT. I have never felt that court-ordered busing was the proper answer to quality education. On the other hand, as President, I am obligated to see that the law is enforced. We have proposed--or I signed a bill, rather, in 1974 or early 1975, that provided a list of steps that should be taken by the executive branch and the court as guidelines in resolving the problem of segregation in school systems. I think that the courts ought to follow those guidelines. I think the executive branch ought to follow those guidelines. If they do, I think it is a better way to achieve desegregation and to provide quality education.
The Federal Government can help them in the following ways: through Federal revenue sharing, a concept long advanced by our party, which has returned $23,500 million of Federal taxes to State and local authorities to spend as they see fit under local citizen control; through consolidating scores of complicated, overlapping, wasteful Federal programs into a few broad and flexible grants. With this Federal money, the 50 States and their subdivisions can better handle their obligations in such fields as health, education, and welfare. We are all familiar with the food stamp scandals. We all know about the shocking abuses in other welfare programs.
The American people in 1976 are not concerned with the polished image of candidates, but rather with the hard issues facing this country. They are concerned about jobs. They are concerned about the cost of health. They are concerned about housing, education, crime, and they are concerned about the cost of government and the price of groceries.
I believe, and believe most deeply, that revenue sharing is far, far more important and effective legislation. Over the last 4 years, 22 percent of general revenue sharing funds from the Federal Government to your States and to your local communities have been spent on education. Twenty-four percent has been spent to improve local law enforcement and public safety programs. Fourteen percent was spent for better transportation--7 percent on environmental protection, 7 percent on health. This is money spent to make your cities, counties, and States cleaner, safer, and better places in which to live. And this is an important statistic. Unlike other programs in which the Federal Government is involved, the cost of administering this program is only one-twelfth of 1 percent on every dollar. That is a good record, and that is the kind of a program the Federal Government ought to undertake and carry out.
Now, the thrust of this program--and this is the important point--this is Federal money that goes to States, cities, counties with no strings attached. And it shows here the kind of distribution, and it covers in the utilization, education, public works, community programs, hospitals, et cetera.
The reason I am concerned is that many of them, when they got out of the service, got married, started a job, and began to raise their family, and then after several years, decided that they wanted to go to college and increase their education so that they might be able to move up in their profession, or things of this nature. But they are now faced with, actually, an arbitrary cut-off date of May 31, 1976, where they will lose all educational benefits.
THE PRESIDENT. Under existing law, a GI is entitled to receive those benefits for a 10-year period--in other words, he got out of the service and at any time from that date for the next 10 years, he can take GI educational training. I think this is a fairly decent, fair opportunity for a person. And there are many, as a matter of fact, who recommend that it ought to be cut back.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the concept that began in World War II was that those that served in World War II in combat and had been deprived of an educational opportunity should be given an opportunity to go back to school. And there was this cutoff first at 8 years, now at 10 years.
The one on the right--no, that is all the same one. We have one here on education, too. But what you are saying is best illustrated by this particular mess chart. You've got 15 categorical grant programs with all the verification, all of the applications, and the net result is you waste half of your time and a good share of your money in paper shuffling.
My concern is--and I think it is the concern of a lot of my friends--that education is the strength and the backbone of the country. My son, at the end of your next term, Mr. President, will be getting ready to go to college. And I am Wondering what plans you have or what programs you propose to present that will allow those people in the middle areas the ability to have their children attend college, and specifically, the private institutions as opposed to the public institutions.
We have increased our funding, for example, in a wide spectrum--education, unemployment compensation, the whole area of human assistance. We have recommended in the budget for the current fiscal year more money than any administration in the history of the United States for social programs.
As you recall, the year 1975 opened with rancor and with bitterness. Political misdeeds of the past had neither been forgotten nor forgiven. The longest, most divisive war in our history was winding toward an unhappy conclusion. Many feared that the end of that foreign war of men and machines meant the beginning of a domestic war of recrimination and reprisal. Friends and adversaries abroad were asking whether America had lost its nerve. Finally, our economy was ravaged by inflation--inflation that was plunging us into the worse recession in four decades. At the same time, Americans became increasingly alienated from big institutions. They were steadily losing confidence, not just in big government but in big business, big labor, and big education, among others. Ours was a troubled land.
Including my health care program reforms, I propose to consolidate some 59 separate Federal programs and provide flexible Federal dollar grants to help States, cities, and local agencies in such important areas as education, child nutrition, and social services. This flexible system will do the job better and do it closer to home.
The first is, how can we help to create an economic climate so that you can use your education in a rewarding job?
Secondly, how can we keep the peace so that you can stay on the job? The most important function of your education is to equip you for a satisfying job so that you can enjoy what life has to offer to you in the future.
Our prime responsibility is to provide the finest medical care for those who were injured in wartime, and we have 170 or 180 USVA hospitals, and we have substantially increased the medical and nursing care personnel so that we give quality care to those veterans who are in these hospitals. Number two, there is not going to be any elimination of the GI educational benefits for those veterans who have served in wartime.
Let me make one alternative comment. The GI bill was passed during World War II for those 16 million Americans who served so when they got out they could get an education. It expired after World War II. Korea came along, again combat, and it was reenacted.
Now the question is whether in peacetime you should continue giving educational benefits to those who serve under an all-volunteer system?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me raise a question. We want an all-volunteer service, and we have got it. There is no more draft. I am all for it. But if you give educational benefits to an all-volunteer force, and you want them to stay in so we have career personnel, and at the same time, you give them educational benefits so that is an incentive for them to get out, it doesn't make much sense from the point of view of the Government.
Now, I think we can solve it, and this is the way it ought to be solved. If a young man volunteers, he has a high school education, we ought to give him educational opportunities in the service so that he can go to school, get his college degree so the service will have him with a higher education, rather than having him get out to get an education. That is the better way to solve it.
THE PRESIDENT. I submitted to the Congress in January of this year a revised Federal aid to education program that would do away with 26 categorical grant programs and give the same amount of money with a $200 million or $300 million bonus, but do it in what we call a block grant approach.
In other words, the Federal Government would give the money to the State and to the local units of government without a requirement of matching, and instead of giving it in 26 pieces it would go in one piece. So that at the local level--and this is the crux of the matter--at the local level the people in Indianapolis or Kokomo or South Bend or Fort Wayne could make the decision themselves how they want to spend that money on their education program in their hometown.
But I can say this: I'm doing the best I can to get away from that. And during the next 10 days, the American people will not see the Carter campaign running television advertisements or newspaper advertisements based on a personal attack on President Ford's character. I believe that the opposite is true with President Ford's campaign. And I hope that we can leave those issues, in the next 10 days, about personalities and mistakes of the past--we've both matte some mistakes--and talk about unemployment, inflation, housing, education, taxation, government organization, stripping away of secrecy, and the things that are crucial to the American people.
Now we have a very wide-ranging group of advisers who help me prepare for these debates and who teach me about international economics and foreign affairs, defense matters, health, education, welfare, government reorganization-I'd say several hundred of them, and they are very fine and very highly qualified.
A mayor of a city like New York, for example, needs to know 18 months or 2 years ahead of time what responsibility the city will have in administration and in financing, in things like housing, pollution control, crime control, education, welfare and health. This has not been done, unfortunately. I remember the headline in the Daily News that said, "Ford To New York--Drop Dead."
I think it's very important that our cities know that they have a partner in the Federal Government. Quite often, Congress has passed laws in the past designed to help people with the ownership of homes and with the control of crime and with adequate health care and better education programs and so forth. Those programs were designed to help those who need it most, and quite often this has been in the very poor people and neighborhoods in the downtown urban centers. Because of the greatly advantaged persons who live in the suburbs--better education, better organization, more articulate, more aware of what the laws are--quite often this money has been channeled out of the downtown centers where it's needed.
Also, I favor all revenue sharing money being used for local governments and also to remove the prohibitions in the use of revenue sharing money, so that it can be used to improve education and health care. We have now, for instance, only 7 percent of the total education costs being financed by the Federal Government. When the Nixon-Ford administration started, this was 10 percent. That's a 30-percent reduction in the portion that the Federal Government contributes to education in just 8 years and, as you know, the education costs have gone up tremendously.
The Department of HUD is enforcing the new legislation that takes care of redlining. What we are doing is saying that there are opportunities--business opportunities, educational opportunities, responsibilities--where people with talent--blacks or any other minority--can fully qualify.
We've got a 30-percent or 40-percent unemployment rate among minority young people. And there has been no concerted effort given to the needs of those who are both poor and black, or poor and who speak a foreign language. And that's where there has been a great generation of despair and ill-health and lack of education and lack of purposefulness and a lack of hope for the future.
MR. CARTER. I would not work hard to support any of those. We have always had, I think, a lot of constitutional amendments proposed but the passage of them has been fairly slow and few and far between. In the 200-year history, there has been a very cautious approach to this. Quite often we have a transient problem. I am strongly against abortion. I think abortion is wrong. I don't think the Government ought to do anything to encourage abortion, but I don't favor a constitutional amendment on the subject. But short of a constitutional amendment, and within the confines of a Supreme Court ruling, I will do everything I can to minimize the need for abortions with better sex education, family planning, with better adoptive procedures. I personally don't believe that the Federal Government ought to finance abortions, but I draw the line and don't support a constitutional amendment. However, I honor the right of people to seek the constitutional amendments on school busing, on prayer in the schools, and on abortion, but among those you named, I won't actively work for the passage of any of them.
Employment ought to be restored to our people. We have become almost a welfare state. We spend now 700 percent more on unemployment compensation than we did 8 years ago when the Republicans took over the White House. Our people want to go back to work. Our education system can be improved. Secrecy ought to be stripped away from government, and a maximum of personal privacy ought to be maintained. Our housing programs have gone bad. It used to be that the average family could own a house, but now less than a third of our people can afford to buy their own homes.
In America, it is interesting to note, more than a dozen colleges were founded even before we became an independent nation. Wheaton College shares in this very distinguished tradition of private higher education. Thanks to the vision and to the dedication of private citizens and organizations, there are now more than 1,500 privately supported colleges and universities in America with a combined enrollment of more than 2 million students.
These institutions provide a reservoir and a training ground for national leadership and talent. By both complementing on the one hand and competing with public institutions of higher education, they help America to achieve the same diversity in higher education that we are proud to have throughout our national life.
Let me repeat what I have said many times before, that I strongly support the principle of private volunteer giving to help finance higher education. If these institutions should close their doors shifting the burden from private donors to public taxpayers, the tax load would be heavy indeed. It would add billions and billions of dollars a year to the national tax burden, hundreds of millions of dollars each year in the State of Illinois alone.
Therefore, I repeat here this morning as I have said on other occasions, I would oppose any legislative proposals which would discourage private financial support for our colleges and universities. We must never threaten this vital educational resource.
But we do run into a practical problem. The practical problem is we have unemployment at the national average of about 7.5 percent today. And it does raise the question whether these foreign students coming here take a job away from an American who wants a job to raise his family or to get his education.
So, it has to be on a selective basis and, if so, I think it can be handled appropriately. I agree with you entirely that these young Europeans or others coming to this country for an education, a living experience with American families, may go back in most instances and are good will ambassadors for the United States.
It should be a source of great pride to alm of us that this country is now providing higher education and training to 1 million veterans of the Vietnam era. But like all of us, they are feeling the pinch of inflation and feeling it badly. With this in mind, we have proposed that their wide range of benefits be increased to keep up with the cost of living.
But I was well received there, and I had a fine opportunity to present a new concept that we have for higher education. This is another opportunity on the Notre Dame campus to continue that dialog that I hope will not only expand but grow by leaps and bounds between the academic community and the Federal Government.
As we look at the progress in your country, which includes great educational advancements for your people, social progress for the people of Tunisia, an increase in the per capita income of the people of Tunisia, you should be very proud of the progress that has been achieved. But I know that the efforts of your President, of you, and others are aimed toward greater progress in the days ahead.
I think it is instructive to recall that this Academy was founded during the Jeffersonian administration. Thomas Jefferson was consistently suspicious of large standing armies and an ardent supporter in his insistence on civilian authority over the military. Nevertheless, Thomas Jefferson was a champion of quality and educational excellence. President Jefferson knew that freedom's defense could not be entrusted to amateurs in a world of expansionist powers and opportunistic pirates. Whatever price our poor and youthful Republic had to pay for its full independence and the protection of its lawful interest, Jefferson and the Congress of his day--and, I might add, the people--were willing to pay.
Your apprenticeship, with its basic education, is ending, but you may be expected to use its lessons at any time. It is an enormous human test, but testing makes men as well as nations stronger and far more confident.
Let me say parenthetically, I am confident, with your educational background, the experiences that you have had and will have, and your interest, all of you will do an infinitely better job when you start running things than we have.
THE PRESIDENT. I think we have tried, but I must confess that we haven't been as successful as we should have. And the best evidence of a lack of a successful education program is that Congress doesn't comprehend the problem we are in. [Laughter]
A career in the military today, in my judgment, is a very promising one with all the benefits educationally, et cetera, that are available. I think it is regrettable if the situation does exist that young people today don't look at the military with admiration, because they should.
We believe that the freedom of the individual is important, that each of you should not be overcrowded by the Federal Government of certain rights, whether they are in education, in industry, in your community. The right of each of you as an individual is a sacred trust to us.
THE PRESIDENT. I think we have to decide in the first place what we are really trying to do by busing before you discuss whether it is good or bad. All of us-white, black, every American, in my opinion--wants quality education.
Now, the Court decided in 1954 that separate but equal schools were unconstitutional, and the courts have decided that busing is one way to try and desegregate on the one hand and perhaps improve education on the other.
But then I think I have the right to give what I think is a better answer to the achievement of quality education, which is what we all seek. And there is always more than one answer. I think that quality education can be enhanced by better school facilities, lower pupil-teacher ratios, the improvement of the neighborhood, as such. Those are better answers, in my judgment, than busing under a court order.
Quality education can be achieved by more than one method. I was reading in the Washington Post this morning a column by one of the outstanding black columnists, Mr. Raspberry. And Mr. Raspberry has come to the conclusion that court-ordered forced busing is not the way to achieve quality education for blacks or whites in a major metropolitan area. That is a very significant decision by Mr. Raspberry, who I think Mr. Dudman, for example, highly respects.
THE PRESIDENT. So far there has been a minimum of local disorder. I hope that that attitude can prevail in the months ahead as the police involvement and the Federal marshal involvement becomes less and less. I am always an optimist, even though I disagree with the method by which they are trying to achieve quality education.
THE PRESIDENT. I look upon my efforts here as part of the responsibility that I have as President to talk to groups in the education field, in the labor field, in other areas--and I also feel it is a part of my responsibility on this trip to help the party per se, to help get the party strengthened in the responsibility it has for organization as well as fundraising. There is nothing in this trip that relates to my candidacy as such.
I have been opposed to busing as a means of achieving quality education from its inception. My record in the Congress in voting for civil rights legislation is a good one. So, I believe that the real issue is quality education. It can be achieved better for disadvantaged people, minorities, by other means.
Now, education is only one facet of this crisis. It also goes into the other social systems--transportation, communications, recreation within the cities. I don't recall hearing any programs recently by this Administration, the past Administration, about reversing this--what I would term a spiral downward of our big cities--to correct that problem. Because if we don't correct the problem in the near future, killing the cities will thereby lead to a worsening of life in the United States, if you want to use a broader term.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there are a number of Federal educational programs that are aimed at helping local communities in a very broad sense. But the one that is aimed specifically at meeting the problem of those communities that are under court order or under HEW administrative requirement for the current fiscal year--if my recollection is accurate--it is about $250 million.
I applaud your efforts to revitalize the city, Ken. Your new container ports, your commercial buildings, your educational institutions--I think these testify to the commitment that a person is making to make this city, a great city in the history of the United States, a better place in which to live. I thank you very much.
If I might reminisce just a moment--this is early fall in the great State of Connecticut--it hardly seems possible that about 40 years ago, I came from the State of Michigan in August of 1935 and spent the next 5-plus years in New Haven, working for one of the finest people that I have ever known. He gave me my first job and was tremendously influential in helping to guide me in how to handle the job. But more importantly he gave me the opportunity not only to have a job but to further my education. For that wonderful opportunity to me, I want to thank, before all of you, a very old and very dear friend of mine, Ducky Pond of Yale University.
Actually, this State and the rest of the South are justifiably proud of great breakthroughs. Your excellent educational institutions, your thriving industries, your productive agricultural activities demonstrate what Americans can do. The South has moved from a basic agricultural economy to a modern industrial society which manufactures much of America's total output. More and more people are moving, for good reason, into the South. You are growing far more rapidly than any other region of our country.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me take each of the consolidations. In the case of education, which includes elementary and secondary education, which includes vocational education, aid to the handicapped and libraries, the figure for fiscal 1977 is $3,300 million. We have added a sweetener of $150 million, so there is no cutback, none whatsoever, in the Federal aid to education. It is an increase rather than a cutback.
We simply are emphasizing with this approach a better delivery system of the services, whether it is health, social services, education, or child nutrition.
I am not going to give up on properly elected officials at the State and local level. I think they do a good job. And all we are doing is giving them money to carry out the kind of programs. And the programs in education may be different in Florida from those in Maine. The programs in the field of health may be different in South Carolina than they are in Alaska.
3 The President was referring to diagrams for the health services, education, and food and nutrition programs of the Federal Government.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, as I recall, the percentage of money spent on education nationwide by the Federal Government is a relatively small part of it. And, actually, in our education program we are recommending $150 million more. So, we are adding to the pot as far as the Federal Government is concerned.
I will ask Secretary Mathews to give you a more complete answer, but the Federal contribution to education is a relatively small part of the total that is Spent by States and local communities for education. So, the switch here I don't think is significant, particularly when the Federal Government has the total responsibility for our national security. And that is our prime obligation in this Complicated world in which we live.
David.
THE PRESIDENT. I do not think it is needed and necessary to divide the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The enactment of the necessary legislation to move to the block grants in health, child nutrition, social services, and education will relieve very substantially Secretary Mathews' administrative problems. As you can well see from the chart, if we were able to do that, which I hope we can, I see absolutely no need and necessity for tearing apart the Department of HEW.
THE PRESIDENT. I firmly believe in the all-volunteer military force. I believe that the experience in the last 3 years has been good. All of the services have been able to recruit all of the manpower they needed. They have been able to increase the educational requirements and still get all of the manpower that they wanted in a voluntary way. So, I strongly believe in an all-voluntary military force, a career force. And the experience in the last several years has been very encouraging. And I think we ought to continue it.
We have also recommended the full funding of the comprehensive education training program--I think that is around $1,600 million--to get people who are unemployed to be trained for subsequent employment. Those are good programs.
A far better job can be done in the providing of those services, in the delivery of those services if the Federal Government makes available the money but gives the responsibility to the locally elected officials. And this is what we have tried to do in the budget that I proposed for the consolidation of Federal health programs, Federal aid and assistance to primary and secondary education, Federal assistance in the social services area.
The first is, how can we help to create an economic climate so that you can use your education in a rewarding job?
Secondly, how can we keep the peace so that you can stay on the job? The most important function of your education is to equip you for a satisfying job so that you can enjoy what life has to offer to you in the future.
Our prime responsibility is to provide the finest medical care for those who were injured in wartime, and we have 170 or 180 USVA hospitals, and we have substantially increased the medical and nursing care personnel so that we give quality care to those veterans who are in these hospitals. Number two, there is not going to be any elimination of the GI educational benefits for those veterans who have served in wartime.
Let me make one alternative comment. The GI bill was passed during World War II for those 16 million Americans who served so when they got out they could get an education. It expired after World War II. Korea came along, again combat, and it was reenacted.
Now the question is whether in peacetime you should continue giving educational benefits to those who serve under an all-volunteer system?
THE PRESIDENT. Let me raise a question. We want an all-volunteer service, and we have got it. There is no more draft. I am all for it. But if you give educational benefits to an all-volunteer force, and you want them to stay in so we have career personnel, and at the same time, you give them educational benefits so that is an incentive for them to get out, it doesn't make much sense from the point of view of the Government.
Now, I think we can solve it, and this is the way it ought to be solved. If a young man volunteers, he has a high school education, we ought to give him educational opportunities in the service so that he can go to school, get his college degree so the service will have him with a higher education, rather than having him get out to get an education. That is the better way to solve it.
THE PRESIDENT. You are not going to have to give up anything. As a matter of fact, in the budget--and here is a copy of it--I have added $150 million to the primary and secondary education funding program. But I want to add this. I could show you a mess chart for education programs just like this one from the Federal Government. It would have 15 programs, and it would be just as big a mess as this one is.
Now, I have recommended that we take primary and secondary education, that we take vocational education, that we take aid for the handicapped and library programs which total roughly $3,300 million, add $150 million to it and have a block grant program. I think that is a far better way of getting Federal money from Washington to Gainesville or to Tallahassee--to your community--so that you have flexibility in the decisionmaking process as to where and how you want to put that money. Now, we would require that 75 percent of that total money would go to the disadvantaged under the definition, but it would do away with 15 programs and have one program.
There are other programs, however, that are aimed at helping the educational problems related to migrant workers, but they are not included within the general revenue sharing program.
THE PRESIDENT. I think the concept of the general revenue sharing is to help a local or State unit of government meet its financial problems and for the decisionmaking at the local level. But at the same time, the Federal Government does recognize that the migrant worker education problem is a serious one, so there are certain programs that focus in directly on that. But I don't think you ought to write into the general revenue sharing specifics as to how the money ought to be spent, or it's not general revenue sharing.
THE PRESIDENT. In the education block grant program that I talked about a minute ago--which is different from general revenue sharing--there would be money to help the migrant labor education problem, including money for bilingual education, et cetera. So there would be money either in block grants or categorical grants for that specific problem.
Now that that has proven to be a very sound program, we are recommending or I have proposed to the Congress that we take 27 educational categorical grant programs-27 of them--combine them into one, give to the school districts the same amount of money and let them decide how they on the local level-here in Keene or in Manchester or in Los Angeles or in Seattle--let them decide how that money can be best spent under local decisionmaking by Charlie Burns and others who know something about the educational problems right here in Keene. I think that makes a lot more sense and it will in effect deliver the Federal dollars more effectively to the local level.
THE PRESIDENT. I would not limit my recommendations to what you might take in college, because I think your whole educational process from kindergarten through college or to graduate school is equally important, but I would make two recommendations: I would study government; I would study history--the history of the United States.
The taxpayers of Michigan and New Hampshire shouldn't support the education of a Congressman's child in Washington, D.C., or Maryland or Virginia. That kind of a program is so mixed up that we have got to sit clown and sort it out, take care of A and maybe some of B, but doggone it we really can't let the program 'run wild the way it is going at the present time.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we will take a look at it. And let me add this, if I might. Under my block grant programs for primary and secondary education and vocational rehabilitation, aid to the handicapped, we would put more money into what I think the circumstances you are describing into Dover and you and Dover would have a lot more control on how you spend that money than you do at the present time.
On the question of busing, the Supreme Court has tried to do two things: It has tried to provide quality education; it has tried to end segregation. Those are worthy objectives, I agree with that. I think the emphasis should be on quality education. The emphasis should be on ending segregation, but I think the Supreme Court, and our courts, particularly--some courts have used the wrong remedies, and I vigorously oppose them.
It is my feeling that there has been a developing attitude on the part of some of the courts, however, to take a more moderate view in exercising their constitutional authority to handle the problem. And let me illustrate it very quickly. Three years ago we had a Federal judge in Detroit who was going to mass bus children from our county to another--not just from suburbs to the city. He is no longer the judge handling that case. We now have a Federal judge who is handling it, and he has understood the problem. And the net result of his order, which seeks to achieve quality education and desegregation, is accepted by the people of Detroit because it is responsible, it is moderate.
I have tried to explain my own personal philosophy and illustrate that in some parts of the country other judges have used their constitutional remedy to be very effective in achieving both quality education on the one hand and desegregation on the other.
THE PRESIDENT. You are exactly right. I have recommended to the Congress that we take 24 primary, secondary--or elementary and secondary education categorical grant programs, consolidate them in one block grant program, and that the money should go to the States and to the local units of government without any matching requirements, so that at the local and State level, independent decisions could be made as to which area there should be local emphasis.
The local emphasis in Peoria might be different than the legitimate needs and local emphasis in Miami, or the local emphasis or needs in Grand Rapids might happen to be different from what they are in San Francisco. So, the block grant program gives flexibility. And we have promised every State and every local unit of government they will get no less money than they've gotten this current fiscal year, and they have much more decisionmaking responsibility at the local and the State level. The more we get education decisions made at the local level without court interference, the better off we are in the United States.
From the material point of view, we want a prosperous, healthy economy so that people have an opportunity to be gainfully employed, to work and to enjoy themselves. And we want a country that is strong enough to protect freedom here and to work with those who want freedom elsewhere. But the long-range goal of this country ought to be--this is the vision or the dream that I think we ought to have for you and those your age--we want freedom, freedom from mass government, freedom from mass education, freedom from mass industry and mass labor.
THE PRESIDENT. For higher education?
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have proposed a block grant program [or elementary and secondary schools, which is, I think, a forward looking step because at the present time we have roughly 27 elementary and secondary categorical grant programs. They really keep the decisionmaking as to lower education in Washington, not at the local or State level.
So, I have recommended to the Congress that we consolidate those 20-plus elementary and secondary school programs into 1 block grant program, and then let the same or more amount of money--in fact, we have recommended more money--the decisionmaking be determined at the State and the local level. I believe that the problems of North Carolina elementary and secondary education are quite different than those may be in Alaska or the ones in Maine may be different than those in Florida. So, they end up with the same or more money but the decision as to how that money from the Federal Government should be spent would be made locally.
I think that makes a lot of sense. I know it cuts down on redtape. I know it would cut down on Federal bureaucracy. And I think it would be good for education. But we have, at this point, no specific plans for a block grant program as far as higher education is concerned.
