To deter war and to preserve our national security, we maintain the world's most efficient, alert, and best equipped armed forces. They are all volunteers. And we intend to keep it that way. And they serve in a very high state of readiness for the benefit of all of us. We remain the world's greatest democracy, symbolizing human aspirations for liberty as well as for progress.
We believe in ourselves and in our traditional values. Self-confidence in America is vital to our national security and survival. Acrimony and antagonism left over from another day only undermine our capacity to face the future with better results. Blind criticism is no better than blind faith. The President, acting in consultation with the Congress, must be able to maintain our world status from a position of strength. This is impossible unless we can speak to the rest of the world with one voice. American foreign policy is motivated by the will of the American people.
THE PRESIDENT. The United States needs, must have, for our national security in peace and/or in war, a very top-grade, the very finest intelligence community, whether it is the CIA or any one of the other organizations.
One thing that my experience has taught me is that America needs strong defenses to keep it secure and at peace. I believe in peace through strength. If we are strong enough, we can deter aggression, we can maintain the peace, and we can take care of our national security against any challenge from any quarter. As a nation today, we are second to none in military strength. And I, with the help of the Congress, intend to keep it that way.
We have three objectives: first, to prevent an escalation of the violence which in time could threaten our national security; second, to realize popular aspirations while guaranteeing minority rights and ensuring economic progress; third, to resist the intervention in the African situation by outside forces.
The following matters are still under investigation in this Office and may prove to have some direct connection to activities in which Mr. Nixon is personally involved:1. Tax deductions relating to the gift of pre-Presidential papers.2. The Colson obstruction of justice plea in the Ellsberg matter.3. The transfer of the national security wire tap records from the FBI to the White House.4. The initiating of wire tapping of John Sears.5. Misuse of IRS information.6. Misuse of IRS through attempted initiation of audits as to "enemies."7. The dairy industry pledge and its relationship to the price support change.8. Filing of a challenge to the Washington Post ownership of two Florida television stations.9. False and evasive testimony at the Kleindienst confirmation hearings as to White House participation in Department of Justice decisions about ITT.10. The handling of campaign contribution by Mr. Rebozo for the personal benefit of Mr. Nixon.
I think the CIA is vitally important to our total national security, both diplomatically as well as militarily. I can assure you that they do, in the areas that I am intimately familiar with, an excellent job of providing the Department of Defense and providing me with information that is important for decisionmaking process on what I think we should do militarily or diplomatically, and they do a fine job on behalf of the Department of Defense.
We also believe that the United States must be second to none in national security. We believe that our Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines must be strong. That is the best way to achieve the peace and to preserve the peace.
Under no circumstances--and I want to be very clear on this--will I permit the dismantling or the destruction of an intelligence agency or community, because that does involve our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is any disharmony. On some occasions two very able people have some disagreements, but there is nothing that has seriously jeopardized the execution of our foreign policy or the carrying out of our national security program.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me give a little background, if I might. For three administrations-President Johnson, President Nixon, and myself--negotiations have been going on with the Government of Panama concerning that problem. If you will refresh your memory, you will recall there were serious riots in Panama, I think in 1965. Around 30 people were killed, including some Americans. Now, these negotiations are going on. I have taken the position that we will not accept--and I would not recommend to the Senate--any proposal that interfered with the national security of the canal, that would interfere with the operations of the canal.
Now, I would not, under any circumstances, do anything in the negotiations or submitting proposals to the Senate that undercut our national security. Now, within those confines, these negotiations are going on. And I think it would be not wise for me to go into any of the details, because we have an outstanding negotiator down there who has instructions within those broad guidelines.
To deter war and to preserve our national security, we maintain the world's most efficient, alert, and best equipped armed forces. They are all volunteers. And we intend to keep it that way. And they serve in a very high state of readiness for the benefit of all of us. We remain the world's greatest democracy, symbolizing human aspirations for liberty as well as for progress.
We believe in ourselves and in our traditional values. Self-confidence in America is vital to our national security and survival. Acrimony and antagonism left over from another day only undermine our capacity to face the future with better results. Blind criticism is no better than blind faith. The President, acting in consultation with the Congress, must be able to maintain our world status from a position of strength. This is impossible unless we can speak to the rest of the world with one voice. American foreign policy is motivated by the will of the American people.
THE PRESIDENT. The United States needs, must have, for our national security in peace and/or in war, a very top-grade, the very finest intelligence community, whether it is the CIA or any one of the other organizations.
THE PRESIDENT. There just are not that many that want that, so you can't do it on a one-for-one basis. I am all for using our food, which our farmers produce in such quantities. And we are very lucky, because if we did not have the American farmer producing that food, we would have a horrendous adverse balance of payments with the oil we buy from the Arab nations. Now, we ought to use our food for two purposes: number one, for humanitarian purposes and, number two, we ought to use it for the execution or the supplementing of our own national security policies. And we are doing both of it, and we are going to continue doing it.
So, it is not something that I have jurisdiction over or the executive branch has jurisdiction over. If the Speaker will ask us to do anything within the law, we will do it to try and find out the person that I think has damaged our national security.
Thank you all very, very much.
The time has come for society to act in its own self-defense. I favor the use of the death penalty in the Federal criminal system in accordance with proper constitutional standards. The death penalty in appropriate instances should be imposed upon the conviction of sabotage, murder, espionage, and treason. Of course, the maximum penalty should not be applied if there is duress or impaired mental capacity or similar extenuating circumstances. But in murders involving substantial danger to the national security, or when the defendant is a coldblooded, hired killer, the use of capital punishment is fully justified.
For example, I am recommending that the Attorney General proceed to work with the Congress to establish legislation for electronic surveillance so that he, representing the administration, would have to go to the court to get the authority even in national security matters. Under the present setup, the Attorney General can simply do it without going to the court if it involves national security. This is quite contrary to the impression that you raised with the question that you asked.
THE PRESIDENT. The budget that I submitted to the Congress in January, for the first time in 10 to 15 years, shows an increase in the proportion of Federal expenditures for national defense. And I would expect in the years ahead to do the same thing, and let me tell you why. The United States today is second to none, as I said in my prepared remarks, militarily. But for the last 10 or 15 years, the percentage of Federal expenditures for national security has gone down. The expenditures in real dollars for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines has gone down.
At the same time, the expenditures by the Soviet Union for their national security forces have gone up. Our position today is sound. We can deter aggression; we can keep the peace, and we can protect our national security. But if we don't approve the military budget that I submitted for the next fiscal year and the one that I will submit the next year--and all of them will be going up a bit-the national defense of this country could be in jeopardy.
Now, we have to get the Congress this year--instead of cutting national security as they have, instead of cutting the funds for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines as they have been doing for the last 10 years, they have to approve the budget that I recommended this year, next year, and the following years, because we have to maintain our forces ready. They have to be well equipped, they have to be trained, and they have to be led. And that kind of a budget that I submitted will obtain those objectives.
But the main point I want to make is that we have to have adequate funding so we can buy new ships, so we can buy new weapons to protect the national security of America in the future as we have in the past.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe in capital punishment for very clearly defined criminal acts. In the Federal Government, I believe there should be capital punishment for espionage, for subversion, for things or acts that are against the national security of the United States. And in addition, I think capital punishment for kidnaping is a legitimate area.
Now, there is one other area of responsibility that the Federal Government has under the Constitution; that is, the national security, the defense of this great country. Let me tell you--and I say it very firmly and very strongly-the United States of America today is second to none in military capability, and we are going to stay there. Oh, I know there are some critics who charged otherwise, but I don't really have much faith in those who downgrade America. I think we ought to speak up for America.
Let me say that the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marines are well-equipped, well-trained, alert. They are on the perimeters, and they are doing a great job for us. We should support them, and we do. They are strong enough to deter aggression, they are strong enough to maintain the peace, and they are strong enough to protect our national security. They are great, and we should give them 100 percent support, as we do.
It is fundamentally required that the Federal Government have a responsible, equitable taxing program, and it is equally important that we have a strong, alert, ready, well-equipped, well-led national security program.
Now, Californians are especially aware of our national security requirements. You know them not only because of the participation of your colleges and universities in research and development, not only because of your industry that makes significant contributions to our defense and security programs but you are on the border, so to speak, and everybody in this State has a great stake in what we are trying to do, whether it is in research and development or weapons procurement.
Yet, in this very critical time and crucial period they would try to bind my hands and this administration in providing the continuity and the credibility so essential to America's defense success. They would play politics with world peace and the national security interest of the United States. They seek a strangely unilateral moratorium on America's security while the Soviet Union increases its defense expenditures.
I am determined, as I have been for 28 years in public life, to provide our Army, our Navy, our Air Force, and Marines with the full capability to deter aggression, to maintain our peace and freedom, and to protect our national security. The American people are entitled to no less, and we will not play Russian roulette with so basic an issue.
Now, it is warheads that do the damage if they are called upon to be utilized. So if we are ahead in warheads, I think we have the necessary capability. For what reason? To deter aggression, to maintain the peace, and to protect our national security.
And so this balance has to be restored. I think we have to restore better balance between domestic programs on the one hand and what we invest in our national security on the other.
Then, we have to make absolutely certain and positive that we are unsurpassed militarily, that we maintain our superiority in the productivity of our industry, the productivity of our agriculture, the superiority of our science and technology. When we put it all together, the United States is number one, far ahead of everybody else. And our responsibility, mine and 215 million other Americans, is to maintain that strength so that we can make it easier and better for all of us at home and to protect our national security from outside forces.
My administration, for the past 20 months, has pursued policies that reflect the commonsense and the pragmatic realism which today's complex problems demand--not the simplistic proposals that sound so good on the campaign trail. My experience tells me that I must deal with the world as it is if we are to make it the world that we want it to be. This is particularly true when it comes to the life and death decisions concerning our national security. The decisions made in this very vital area must be right ones. There are no retakes in the Oval Office.
Now, as far as national security policies of this great country are concerned, I am convinced that the American people would rather have a President who is constructively seeking to build the foundations of lasting security than someone who spends most of his time trying to kick them down.
At the Federal level, we must fulfill our obligation to provide national security as well as personal security. Until we can achieve the rule of law in the global sense, a strong military capability is absolutely essential.
Here in Texas you play a very, very important part in maintaining our national security. I was pleased to find out as we flew in here this morning that out at Carswell Air Force Base, that wonderful installation with all those fine people in the Air Force--men, women, uniformed as well as civilian personnel-that they had a recent alert called by their higher ups, and they achieved a 100 percent readiness factor. They should be congratulated.
We will continue this policy, this program of peace through strength and at the same time we will maintain our international leadership, negotiating wherever possible to reduce the level of tensions in the world. There are no easy answers, no simple solutions to the complex problems of personal and national security. But our determination to solve those problems in itself is a source of strength. Our warning to those who threaten our security at home or abroad is the same. Americans will never be intimidated and Americans will keep the security and the independence that we have had for 200 years, and we will keep it forever in the future.
Now, what we're trying to do--as Senator Goldwater says, where he agrees with me and he disagrees with Governor Reagan--we're trying to protect the economic and the military capability of that canal as long as it's necessary in our national security.
In murders involving substantial danger to the national security or when the defendant is a cold-blooded, hired killer, the use of capital punishment is fully justified.
A strong Israel is essential to peace and to the national security interests of the United States. From the time I first ran for Congress in 1948, I recognized the justice of Israel's rebirth and its importance to the United States. I am proud to stand on my consistent 28-year record of support for Israel. You know where I stand. The funds I proposed for Israel in my first two budgets totaled over $4 billion for 27 months. These figures speak more eloquently than words.
We will be as strong as we need to be to keep the peace, to deter aggression, and to protect our national security. But if our foreign policy is to have public support, it must represent the moral values of the American people. What is more moral than peace with freedom and security in the United States?
All of us from wherever we come in the United States are very interested in our national security. Yes, we have peace, we're not drafting anybody anymore. But we have to keep our Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps unsurpassed by anyone. We must keep America number one, and we will under a Ford administration.
Now let me talk just a minute about the national security. This is my third visit to Pascagoula. I came down here in 1962 with my wife, Betty. She commissioned a new submarine over here in the Ingalls shipbuilding yards.
That brings up the subject that I think is of vital importance. I am very proud of the fact that in the last 2 years I have submitted to the Congress and to the American people the two largest military budgets in the history of America--not for the purpose of making war, but for the purpose of preserving peace. And we have turned the situation around so that now Congress, after cutting defense expenditures for the last 10 years some $50 billion--we have convinced the Congress that it's important, it's vital, it's essential that America remain number one, that America will be number one so we can keep the peace, deter aggression, and protect our national security.
From the time that I first ran for Congress in 1948, I recognized that a strong Israel is essential to the cause of peace and the national security of the United States, and I am proud of that record. That record is as old as the State of Israel, and you know where I stand. I stand firm in my commitment to Israel. I am proud that our delegation at the United Nations has fought and will fight any measure that condemns Zionism as racism or would deny Israel her full rights of United Nations membership.
I don't think that you can cut the Defense Department, as some suggest, and have our military capability unsurpassed. To deter aggression, to meet any challenge, to protect our national security, I believe that the President of the United States has an obligation to see to it that the necessary funds are there to buy the best weapons, to have the best leadership, to have the best training, to have the strength that adversaries respect and allies appreciate. Then America can keep the peace that we have and be the leader in the world, and we will under this administration.
When I became President on August 9, 1974, our Nation was deeply divided and tormented. In rapid succession the Vice President and the President had resigned in disgrace. We were still struggling with the after-effects of a long, unpopular, and bloody war in Southeast Asia. The economy was unstable and racing toward the worst recession in 40 years. People were losing jobs. The cost of living was soaring. The Congress and the Chief Executive were at loggerheads. The integrity of our constitutional process and other institutions was being questioned. For more than 15 years domestic spending had soared as Federal programs multiplied, and the expense escalated annually. During the same period our national security needs were steadily shortchanged. In the grave situation which prevailed in August 1974, our will to maintain our international leadership was in doubt.
A year ago I reported that the state of the Union was better--in many ways a lot better--but still not good enough. Common sense told me to stick to the steady course we were on, to continue to restrain the inflationary growth of government, to reduce taxes as well as spending, to return local decisions to local officials, to provide for long-range sufficiency in energy and national security needs. I resisted the immense pressures of an election year to open the floodgates of Federal money and the temptation to promise more than I could deliver. I told it as it was to the American people and demonstrated to the world that in our spirited political competition, as in this chamber, Americans can disagree without being disagreeable.
The following matters are still under investigation in this Office and may prove to have some direct connection to activities in which Mr. Nixon is personally involved:1. Tax deductions relating to the gift of pre-Presidential papers.2. The Colson obstruction of justice plea in the Ellsberg matter.3. The transfer of the national security wire tap records from the FBI to the White House.4. The initiating of wire tapping of John Sears.5. Misuse of IRS information.6. Misuse of IRS through attempted initiation of audits as to "enemies."7. The dairy industry pledge and its relationship to the price support change.8. Filing of a challenge to the Washington Post ownership of two Florida television stations.9. False and evasive testimony at the Kleindienst confirmation hearings as to White House participation in Department of Justice decisions about ITT.10. The handling of campaign contribution by Mr. Rebozo for the personal benefit of Mr. Nixon.
My first objection is to that section that would allow any Federal judge to examine privately or in camera the classified records of any Government agency, including our most sensitive national security and diplomatic secrets, and remove the agency's classification if he found the plaintiff's position to be reasonable. In other words, no credibility was given to the Government's initial decision. I think that is wrong. As a matter of fact, this change in the proposed law would overturn a 1973 Supreme Court ruling which limited judicial review to the determination of whether or not in the initial classification there was, in fact, a classification according to law.
This Nation can be proud of significant achievements in recent years in solving problems and crises. The Berlin agreement, the SALT agreements, our new relationship with China, the unprecedented efforts in the Middle East are immensely encouraging. But the world is not free from crisis. In a world of 150 nations, where nuclear technology is proliferating and regional conflicts continue, international security cannot be taken for granted.
So, let there be no mistake about it: International cooperation is a vital factor of our lives today. This is not a moment for the American people to turn inward. More than ever before, our own well-being depends on America's determination and America's leadership in the whole wide world.
We are a great Nation--spiritually, politically, militarily, diplomatically, and economically. America's commitment to international security has sustained the safety of allies and friends in many areas--in the Middle East, in Europe, and in Asia. Our turning away would unleash new instabilities, new dangers around the globe, which, in turn, would threaten our own security.
THE PRESIDENT. I had not seen Senator Jackson's description of the potentials of the 94th Congress. I hope that that description is not an accurate one, and I am going to wait and see whether they do take the kind of action that might destroy our military capability. I usually agree with Senator Jackson on national defense appropriations, policies, et cetera. If this Congress does slash, without rhyme or reason, the military budget that I have submitted, it could jeopardize our national security. I think it is premature to say they will. I certainly hope they don't. But I can say, without any hesitation, that I will vigorously oppose any attempt to slash, without rhyme or reason, our military strength as represented in the budget that I have submitted.
The Democrats that I know in the Congress are just as dedicated to a strong national security program as I am, so I don't think this Democratic Congress will undercut our national security efforts. They will make some changes, but I don't think--I certainly hope they won't gut the Defense Department.
I hope that we will tell these facts to our friends and neighbors all over the country, because unfortunately too many of those that we live with in our respective communities don't know the facts. They are fed a propaganda line that sounds good superficially but in truth could undercut our national security today and in the future.
Let me express from the bottom of my heart my thanks for your past efforts to bolster our national security. As I said earlier, I recall very vividly meeting with your group on previous occasions. You and the 2 1/2 million women in all of our 50 States, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Panama--which all of you represent--are one of the most potent and effective grassroots lobbies we have for a peaceful and secure America, and I congratulate you for being here and for your never-ending efforts in this very high purpose.
We are going to have a good program in our platform in 1976. It will be based on the concepts of the free enterprise system, continuation of a strong national security program, and a maximum effort to improve and make wholesome and healthy our economy.
Serious problems confront the American people at home. Yet unemployment and the growth of the economy, as well as our national security, are directly related to the relations with the rest of the world.
Today, in the presence of three of my former colleagues, I renew the challenge to the Congress to enact before May 1 of this year a comprehensive energy program. It is essential to our national security, and it is more essential today than it was in January, when I proposed it.
The national interest and national security require as well that we reduce the dangers of war. We shall strive to do so by continuing to improve our relations with potential adversaries.
In a world where information is power, a vital element of our national security lies in our intelligence services. They are essential to our Nation's security in peace as in war. Americans can be grateful for the important but largely unsung contributions and achievements of the intelligence services of this Nation.
The national security budget that I have submitted is the minimum the United States needs in this critical hour. The Congress should review it carefully, and I know it will. But it is my considered judgment that any significant reduction, revision, would endanger our national security and thus jeopardize the peace.
We must guard our own national security and maintain the mutual strength of our alliances in Western Europe and in the Far East, keep our vital commitments to long-term friends, and keep pace in research and development of future defense systems if our recent progress toward reducing the dangers of war is to continue. Obviously, an essential element of our modern national security system is a sound intelligence system. And I do not intend to permit ours to be either publicized or paralyzed in times like these.
It is a very risky business, but it is a very important part of our national security, and I don't think we should discuss--certainly I shouldn't discuss-specifics.
Budget requests for construction subsidies will continue at approximately the same level in the next fiscal year. Expenditures for operational subsidies for United States flagships will climb--and, I think, appropriately--to a record high of $316 million. Our total Federal expenditures for Federal maritime programs--and bear in mind they are an integral, vital part of our total seagoing Navy--will be some $678 million as compared with a relatively smaller sum of about $500 million 2 years ago.
I give you my word that we will have a vital merchant marine in the future, and in the White House I will do as I did in the Congress, work for that objective for our national security.
In fact, the entire Navy-Marine Corps team has these very important, very vital ingredients: combat-proven strength, dynamic leadership, and dedicated professionalism. And we thank them all for these important assets that they contribute to our national security.
However good their intentions, those who claim that America is overarmed and overspending on defense are wrong. It is my very deep conviction we cannot afford to cut any further without endangering our national security. While our own military spending has been declining, others have not been idle. The Soviet Union, for example, is outspending us on defense by at least 20 percent.
Haven of peace and land of action, Tunisia, over the span of very few years, carried out substantial progress in a number of different areas. We feel that economic and social problems cannot be separated from national security considerations. The solution to be found to these problems is therefore the first line of defense. That is why employment, overall development and speeded-up development, and improving the standard of living are our priority objectives.
In this connection, Tunisia feels that the new economic order is a vital reed in order to raise the standard of living of hundreds of millions of men and women, and in order to exorcise the scourges of poverty, hunger, disease, and ignorance which weigh so heavily upon nearly half of mankind. Tunisia is convinced, not only for ethical and ideological reasons but because it feels deeply that this is the essential, the essential token for international security, and that this is indispensable for the development and the harmonious fulfillment of the individual human being. Tunisia is also convinced that mankind as a whole must and can make progress toward setting up this new economic order in a serene and concerted manner, not in a fruitless confrontation.
I believe that the Americans of 1975 are just as willing to pay that same price. That is why I continue to press for a comprehensive 10-year program to develop enough domestic energy to make the United States fully independent of foreign oil and externally fixed prices that threaten both our economic health and our national security. This could be another convincing demonstration to our allies and to our adversaries that Americans have lost neither their nerve nor their national will.
I'm optimistic that we can have a SALT II agreement, but I can assure you, as I have others, that we are going to make sure, make certain that our national security interest is very, very adequately protected, and I think it can be, as I look at the overall picture.
I think there is enough money available for all of our essential programs to be adequately funded. And I think it is important for us to have your support in a completely strong, alert military organization, because if we don't have that kind of strength for national security, many of the other things we try to do cannot be sustained.
I spent 14 years of my 25 years in the Congress working on the defense appropriation bill, so I know a little bit about it. We had Secretaries of Defense come before that committee every year. We had all types of military personnel coming up to justify the budget, and we in those years provided an adequate military force to protect our national security. We didn't give them too much. We gave them enough, and the net result was, our security during a very difficult period was fully adequate for the defense of this country.
But at the same time, in dividing this Federal availability in the area of money, we have to have an adequate amount for our national security. I think if we do it right--and I think we will--the defense will be adequately funded, our people will be adequately supplied, and you who have great responsibilities out through 50 States will likewise get everything we possibly can to help you.
This is one place where second best is worth nothing. The proportion of Federal spending for national security and the proportion of our gross national product going for defense requirements have declined in recent years. The dollar figures in the Federal budget go up, but simply because of inflation. But the weapons we can purchase and the personnel we can afford have declined.
Our potential adversaries are certainly not reducing the levels of their military power. The United States, as a result, must be alert and strong, and it will be. The defense budget which I submitted for fiscal year 1976 represents, under these circumstances, the bare minimum required for our national security. I will vigorously resist all major cuts in every way I can, and I hope I have your help.
Thus, another essential element of any real arms limitation, whether of strategic systems or conventional forces, is our own intelligence capability. Sweeping attacks, overgeneralization against our intelligence activities jeopardize vital functions necessary to our national security. Today's sensations must not be the prelude to tomorrow's Pearl Harbor.
Intelligence in today's world is absolutely essential to our national security-even our survival. It may be even more important in peace than in war. Any reckless Congressional action to cripple the effectiveness of our intelligence services in legitimate operations would be catastrophic. Our potential adversaries and even some of our best friends operate in all intelligence fields with secrecy, with skill, and with substantial resources. I know and I know you know that what we need is an American intelligence capacity second to none.
Finally--and this relates both to our vital intelligence installations and to the imperative need to strengthen key alliances such as NATO--let us now consider our relations with our friend and ally of many years, Turkey. How do you explain to a friend and an ally why arms previously ordered and paid for are not being delivered? How do you explain to your other allies the potential damage that this may cause to our NATO alliance? How do you justify to the American people the loss of strategic intelligence data, with its attendant effect on our national security that this action has caused?
Secondly, related to that, you have got a great naval installation here in Portsmouth--one that is very significant from the national security point of view, one that is a very vital part of the economy of this part of New Hampshire. Let me speak very strongly that Louis Wyman in 1964 and again in 1972 almost single-handedly kept the Portsmouth Navy Yard open so we could have that' facility here defending or helping to defend the peace throughout the world.
Let me add, you elect Louis and he will have an opportunity to continue that strong support for this great navy installation which is such an integral part of our national security forces.
To keep this oil and to keep this natural gas flowing from this region, the Nation must make it economically feasible to search for new production and to develop methods. This is one of the major reasons that I believe decontrol of domestic oil prices is so essential to our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to indicate that our Government is going to interfere with the internal operations of any government anyplace in the world. I think it is a matter that has to be carefully considered in the context of how it relates to our own national security. And to even imply that this country is going to get involved overtly or covertly, I think, is a mistake for the President of the United States.
I commend you and compliment you for this superb work that you do to ensure the peace and maintain our national security.
Under no circumstances--and I want to be very clear on this--will I permit the dismantling or the destruction of an intelligence agency or community, because that does involve our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is any disharmony. On some occasions two very able people have some disagreements, but there is nothing that has seriously jeopardized the execution of our foreign policy or the carrying out of our national security program.
Five years ago the percentages were just about reversed, about 40-some percent for the military and roughly 28 or 29 percent for domestic programs. So, we have been putting a greater and greater emphasis out of our total resources in recent years for people, for cities, for States, for programs. And we have been cutting back a percentage of what we utilize for our national security as we protect our own interests and seek to help others as they are challenged throughout the world.
I want to work with the Congress and with you, the people, to ensure that those who deserve the help of our Nation continue receiving that help--the elderly, the poor, and the men and women who have borne our Nation's arms. Also, I will not permit reductions in our military budget that would jeopardize our national security. We must maintain a strong economy and a strong national defense.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me give a little background, if I might. For three administrations-President Johnson, President Nixon, and myself--negotiations have been going on with the Government of Panama concerning that problem. If you will refresh your memory, you will recall there were serious riots in Panama, I think in 1965. Around 30 people were killed, including some Americans. Now, these negotiations are going on. I have taken the position that we will not accept--and I would not recommend to the Senate--any proposal that interfered with the national security of the canal, that would interfere with the operations of the canal.
Now, I would not, under any circumstances, do anything in the negotiations or submitting proposals to the Senate that undercut our national security. Now, within those confines, these negotiations are going on. And I think it would be not wise for me to go into any of the details, because we have an outstanding negotiator down there who has instructions within those broad guidelines.
Obviously, in the process of reducing spending, a lot of belt-tightening will have to take place. But let me emphasize with conviction and very firm statements that those who deserve help will continue to receive it--the elderly, the poor, the veterans who have borne arms in our Nation's defense. And then I add hurriedly, we will not permit slashes in our national security defense forces that are necessary for the protection of the United States.
But Allied cooperation goes far beyond national security and defense. It reaches out to include new areas of energy cooperation and now intensive consultation to expedite our economic recovery.
This naval air station is a vital part of our total national security capability, and what you do here protects 214 million Americans. And on behalf of them, I thank you for your contribution.
So, it makes my job easier, it makes our country more secure to know that we have people like you serving in our national security forces.
Thank you very, very much.
First, with respect to foreign policy and national security affairs: You will recall that when I became President a year ago last August, I indicated that I believed it was essential to guarantee stability and continuity in the conduct of U.S. foreign policy. I made a conscious decision at that time not to change personnel in the important national security area. I have, however, made a number of significant changes in the Cabinet in the domestic area.
Therefore, I am tonight announcing several personnel changes which I believe will strengthen the Administration in the important area of national security affairs.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me assure you that my record in the Congress and as Vice President and as President has been one of strength in national security affairs, in international relations. I believe that in our attempt to ease tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States, we have achieved a two-way street, and I believe that the policy that I will follow, the team that I have, will continue that policy in the future.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, let me say very emphatically there is no one in this Government more emphatic for a strong national defense and the maintenance of our own national security than myself, Secretary Kissinger, and Don Rumsfeld, and many others who I could mention by name. From the top on down, we believe in strong national defense. And we have sought to implement it, and we need some more help in the Congress. I won't speculate on what Mr. Brezhnev might feel concerning these changes.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe that the decisions that I have made and the announcements that I have made officially give to me the people and the team and organizational structure to continue to carry out an affirmative, successful foreign policy on a global basis and to keep our national security forces second to none. I, therefore, feel very pleased with the acceptance on the part of individuals for these new responsibilities. They are important, not for me, but primarily for the country.
THE PRESIDENT. I felt it was very important at the outset because of the unusual circumstances under which I became President to have continuity, to have stability in the area of national security and foreign policy. That was absolutely essential. And as a result of that we continued a successful foreign policy.
But I have decided to talk about another topic, one of supreme importance to all Americans and indeed to the world, that is, the national security posture and policy of the United States as I see it.
The national security policy of this country--long a solid, nonpartisan policy and the policy which I have supported all of my life, some 25 years in the Congress--is that weakness invites war, that strength is the only sure foundation for peace, and that America, in concert with our allies, must maintain a defense capability second to none. That policy has not changed and will not change.
I reiterate this policy because there has been some criticism and speculation, following my announcement on Monday of several new appointments among my top national security advisers, that such personnel changes signal a policy change by the United States in this extremely important and sensitive area. I want to be absolutely sure that these domestic political potshots are not "heard round the world." Our allies and our adversaries must not be confused and misled. There will be no change in my lifelong devotion to America's strength and vigilance as we seek a safer and saner world.
In my judgment, that big a reduction is far too much. If the United States is going to remain strong, it will require the cooperation of the Congress. I deplore what the Congress has done to the defense budget to date, and I urge that the Senate restore the essential funds that the Defense Department has deemed vital to our national security. It is not just this year's cuts that worry me. Let's look at the trend.
An essential element to any real arms limitation, whether of strategic systems or conventional forces, is our intelligence capability. Sweeping attacks and exposes of intelligence activities jeopardize vital functions necessary to our national security. I did not take the sacred oath of office to stand by passively while the intelligence security of the United States is unilaterally dismantled.
[5.] MR. WILL. Mr. President, you have nominated two very political men, Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Bush, to replace two apolitical men, Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Colby, in sensitive national security positions. And this has caused Senator Jackson to wonder if you are surrounding yourself with yes-men and lackeys, and others are worried that national security advice to you will be politically colored by men who are perhaps interested in becoming your Vice-Presidential running mate in 1976. Might it help, both for the anxiety of the country and any possible Senate fight over these nominations, for you to say now that neither of those men will be your running mate in '76?
It is premature for me to indicate at this stage of the legislative process that I will veto or not veto. I will continue to work with Members of the House and the Senate to get as much military appropriation restored as possible, because the budget I submitted in January was a good budget that is needed and necessary for the national security of the United States. And I will work with the new Secretary and his associates to try and restore as much as I can of that budget cut that so far--roughly $7 billion.
MR. SPIVAK:. Mr. Broder [David S. Broder, Washington Post].
During the past decade, our whole fundamental policy of mutual security and strength has come under sharp attack. I do not intend on this occasion to go into any detailed justification of our entire post-World War II national security policy.
I think these potential developments to some extent tend to validate the so-called domino theory, and if we have one country after another, allies of the United States, losing faith in our word, losing faith in our agreements with them, yes, I think the first one to go could vitally affect the national security of the United States.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is any necessary conflict between the Rockefeller Commission and the one or more Congressional committees. The Rockefeller Commission has been in operation now for a month or two, so they are underway.
They had planned to finish their work within the next months, as I recollect. They may have to go beyond that, depending on certain circumstances, but we intend to make as full a disclosure as is possible without jeopardizing America's national security.
I believe that the Americans of 1975 are just as willing to pay that same price. That is why I continue to press for a comprehensive 10-year program to develop enough domestic energy to make the United States fully independent of foreign oil and externally fixed prices that threaten both our economic health and our national security. This could be another convincing demonstration to our allies and to our adversaries that Americans have lost neither their nerve nor their national will.
To cushion the impact of sudden decontrol if the Congress sustains my veto-as it must--I will lift the special import fees on crude oil and petroleum products. If the Congress fails to sustain my veto and continues counterproductive price controls, I will have no other choice than to continue import fees. These fees were imposed in the first place to induce conservation and reduce consumption and our reliance on foreign oil, which is vital to our national security interests. It is incomprehensible to me that the Congress would jeopardize our ability to achieve energy independence at this critical hour.
THE PRESIDENT. I think, first, the attitude of young people today toward the military should be affirmative. After all, 2,100,000 people serve in the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines. They are the bulwark of our national security.
We also believe that the United States must be second to none in national security. We believe that our Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines must be strong. That is the best way to achieve the peace and to preserve the peace.
THE PRESIDENT. I am not pessimistic at all that the American people will not respond. As a matter of fact, as I travel .around the country I find the American people are eager to cooperate. They can do it in a number of ways. The first is to impress upon their representatives in the Congress, Senators and Congressmen, that we have to move ahead, whether it is in energy, or the economy, or national security. I note a slight change in the attitude of the Congress, because I think the American people are having an impact.
THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to indicate that our Government is going to interfere with the internal operations of any government anyplace in the world. I think it is a matter that has to be carefully considered in the context of how it relates to our own national security. And to even imply that this country is going to get involved overtly or covertly, I think, is a mistake for the President of the United States.
Obviously, in the process of reducing spending, a lot of belt-tightening will have to take place. But let me emphasize with conviction and very firm statements that those who deserve help will continue to receive it--the elderly, the poor, the veterans who have borne arms in our Nation's defense. And then I add hurriedly, we will not permit slashes in our national security defense forces that are necessary for the protection of the United States.
In formulating this budget, I have tried to achieve fairness as well as balance between the taxpayer and those who will benefit from Federal spending, between national security and other pressing needs, and between the desires to solve our problems quickly and the realization that for some problems, good solutions will take more time.
THE PRESIDENT. It relates precisely to our national security. We have had, over the last 10 years, a trend totally in the opposite direction. Ten years ago, the Department of Defense got, roughly, 40-some percent of the Federal outlays, and domestic programs got 32 or 33 percent. And in fiscal 1976, it was almost reversed. And if we are going to have an adequate national security, if we are going to have a capability in conventional or strategic arms, we have to increase our expenditures in fiscal 1977. It is just that our national security dictates it. We have been pinching the national security forces in the last 10 years. And I think we have to have a slight change in that direction.
I will ask Secretary Mathews to give you a more complete answer, but the Federal contribution to education is a relatively small part of the total that is Spent by States and local communities for education. So, the switch here I don't think is significant, particularly when the Federal Government has the total responsibility for our national security. And that is our prime obligation in this Complicated world in which we live.
David.
THE PRESIDENT. I think it's still in the R. &amp; D. stage. We haven't gone beyond that. We always are looking down the road to make sure that we don't rest on our oars. We know our adversaries are not. So, this is one of several programs that takes a look at the future and the need and necessity for the best weapons for our national security.
Bill, do you want to add any comment to that?
DEPUTY SECRETARY CLEMENTS. That's exactly right. I have nothing to add.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe that our ICBM's, the Minutemen, various versions, are a very strong deterrent and a very capable military weapon. We do have the Poseidon and the potential Trident. We have to have a mix. I think it is important not only to have land-based but submarine-launched missiles, ballistic missiles. But I think it is also important to have the manned aircraft, the B-52's and the B-l's that are coming along. We are going to be progressive. We are going to be flexible in our strategic weapon capability. It may mean moving to some version of mobile missiles. It may mean development, as we are, in the cruise missile area. We can't stay static. If we ever get on a plateau and stay there, our national security will be seriously in jeopardy.
In the State of the Union Message, in the budget that I submitted, and in the economic plan or program that was submitted to the Congress just a few days ago, we have tried to do in broad terms the following: number one, a proper balance between the Government on the one hand and the private sector on another; a better balance between the taxpayer on the one hand and those that receive Federal benefits on the other; a proper balance between the Federal Government and State and local units of government; and a proper balance between domestic programs which are essential and our national security.
In the budget that I submitted for fiscal year 1977, for the first time in the last 10 years we gave a slightly larger percentage of total Federal expenditures for our national security so that the defense of this country will be second to none.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me give a little background, if I might. For three administrations-President Johnson, President Nixon, and myself--negotiations have been going on with the Government of Panama concerning that problem. If you will refresh your memory, you will recall there were serious riots in Panama, I think in 1965. Around 30 people were killed, including some Americans. Now, these negotiations are going on. I have taken the position that we will not accept--and I would not recommend to the Senate--any proposal that interfered with the national security of the canal, that would interfere with the operations of the canal.
Now, I would not, under any circumstances, do anything in the negotiations or submitting proposals to the Senate that undercut our national security. Now, within those confines, these negotiations are going on. And I think it would be not wise for me to go into any of the details, because we have an outstanding negotiator down there who has instructions within those broad guidelines.
To deter war and to preserve our national security, we maintain the world's most efficient, alert, and best equipped armed forces. They are all volunteers. And we intend to keep it that way. And they serve in a very high state of readiness for the benefit of all of us. We remain the world's greatest democracy, symbolizing human aspirations for liberty as well as for progress.
We believe in ourselves and in our traditional values. Self-confidence in America is vital to our national security and survival. Acrimony and antagonism left over from another day only undermine our capacity to face the future with better results. Blind criticism is no better than blind faith. The President, acting in consultation with the Congress, must be able to maintain our world status from a position of strength. This is impossible unless we can speak to the rest of the world with one voice. American foreign policy is motivated by the will of the American people.
THE PRESIDENT. The United States needs, must have, for our national security in peace and/or in war, a very top-grade, the very finest intelligence community, whether it is the CIA or any one of the other organizations.
The time has come for society to act in its own self-defense. I favor the use of the death penalty in the Federal criminal system in accordance with proper constitutional standards. The death penalty in appropriate instances should be imposed upon the conviction of sabotage, murder, espionage, and treason. Of course, the maximum penalty should not be applied if there is duress or impaired mental capacity or similar extenuating circumstances. But in murders involving substantial danger to the national security, or when the defendant is a coldblooded, hired killer, the use of capital punishment is fully justified.
We have peace at the present time. We have peace for several reasons. One, we have peace because the United States is strong militarily. And we are not going to weaken our national security, despite the pressure from some sources.
Our Government, like other governments, does take certain actions in the intelligence field to help implement foreign policy and protect national security. I am informed reliably that Communist nations spend vastly more money than we do for the same kind of purposes.
His cooperation with the Eisenhower administration--and I knew it somewhat intimately--on matters of foreign policy and national security was an outstanding one. It seems to me as I recollect--and I sought to last night--it was a model of bipartisan statesmanship.
So, Roudy, you have an obligation to do a first-class job on behalf of a good share of the population of this country, the people who have given dedicated service on behalf of freedom, on behalf of our national security.
The following matters are still under investigation in this Office and may prove to have some direct connection to activities in which Mr. Nixon is personally involved:1. Tax deductions relating to the gift of pre-Presidential papers.2. The Colson obstruction of justice plea in the Ellsberg matter.3. The transfer of the national security wire tap records from the FBI to the White House.4. The initiating of wire tapping of John Sears.5. Misuse of IRS information.6. Misuse of IRS through attempted initiation of audits as to "enemies."7. The dairy industry pledge and its relationship to the price support change.8. Filing of a challenge to the Washington Post ownership of two Florida television stations.9. False and evasive testimony at the Kleindienst confirmation hearings as to White House participation in Department of Justice decisions about ITT.10. The handling of campaign contribution by Mr. Rebozo for the personal benefit of Mr. Nixon.
During the past decade, our whole fundamental policy of mutual security and strength has come under sharp attack. I do not intend on this occasion to go into any detailed justification of our entire post-World War II national security policy.
We want strong, stalwart people in Congress who will bite the bullet and not fade away when they ought to be strong, when they ought to be facing up to the issues and not play politics with something that is involved in the national security.
Speaking of national security, let me just make one observation. I get twice-a-day messages from Henry Kissinger. He just spent about 4 days in Moscow, and he spent a couple of days in India. He spent a couple of days in Pakistan. I got messages from him today in Afghanistan, and he is going two or three or four places after that. But here is a man who is carrying the torch of peace for America. Here is a man that worked night and day to achieve a peace and who is laying the groundwork for a broadening of that peace; whether it is in the Middle East, whether it is in the case of Cyprus or Greece, or whether it is in the case of Western Europe, or whether it is in Latin America, Africa, or Southeast Asia.
Here is a man that is on our side, leading the way with a torch of peace. And what we need in the Congress is Members of the Congress who will back up that kind of leadership, people who won't play politics with national security, who won't play politics with what is good in the furtherance of peace throughout the world.
My first objection is to that section that would allow any Federal judge to examine privately or in camera the classified records of any Government agency, including our most sensitive national security and diplomatic secrets, and remove the agency's classification if he found the plaintiff's position to be reasonable. In other words, no credibility was given to the Government's initial decision. I think that is wrong. As a matter of fact, this change in the proposed law would overturn a 1973 Supreme Court ruling which limited judicial review to the determination of whether or not in the initial classification there was, in fact, a classification according to law.
Americans are no longer in full control of their own national destiny when that destiny depends on uncertain foreign fuel at high prices fixed by others. Higher energy costs compound both inflation and recession, and dependence on others for future energy supplies is intolerable to our national security.
Therefore, later this week, I will sign a Presidential proclamation [4341] which will set in motion the most important and far-reaching energy conservation program in our Nation's history. It is the first step toward regaining our energy freedom. We must reverse our increasing dependency on imported oil. It seriously threatens our national security and the very existence of our freedom and leadership in the free world.
The proclamation is designed to impose higher fees on imported oil which are equitable and fair. For example, it will contain special provisions to avoid undue hardships on certain regions of the country, such as the Northeast, which are heavily dependent upon high-cost foreign oil. On Thursday, I will meet with the Governors of the Northeast States on their special problems.
I think the CIA is vitally important to our total national security, both diplomatically as well as militarily. I can assure you that they do, in the areas that I am intimately familiar with, an excellent job of providing the Department of Defense and providing me with information that is important for decisionmaking process on what I think we should do militarily or diplomatically, and they do a fine job on behalf of the Department of Defense.
As we begin to achieve our near-term conservation goals, the Nation will once again be going in the right direction, which is away from energy dependence. Each day that passes without strong and tough action--which this proclamation is--results in a further drain on our national wealth and on the jobs it creates for the American people. Each day without action means that our economy becomes more and more vulnerable to serious disruption. Each day without action increases the threat to our national security and welfare.
THE PRESIDENT. I had not seen Senator Jackson's description of the potentials of the 94th Congress. I hope that that description is not an accurate one, and I am going to wait and see whether they do take the kind of action that might destroy our military capability. I usually agree with Senator Jackson on national defense appropriations, policies, et cetera. If this Congress does slash, without rhyme or reason, the military budget that I have submitted, it could jeopardize our national security. I think it is premature to say they will. I certainly hope they don't. But I can say, without any hesitation, that I will vigorously oppose any attempt to slash, without rhyme or reason, our military strength as represented in the budget that I have submitted.
The Democrats that I know in the Congress are just as dedicated to a strong national security program as I am, so I don't think this Democratic Congress will undercut our national security efforts. They will make some changes, but I don't think--I certainly hope they won't gut the Defense Department.
I hope that we will tell these facts to our friends and neighbors all over the country, because unfortunately too many of those that we live with in our respective communities don't know the facts. They are fed a propaganda line that sounds good superficially but in truth could undercut our national security today and in the future.
Let me express from the bottom of my heart my thanks for your past efforts to bolster our national security. As I said earlier, I recall very vividly meeting with your group on previous occasions. You and the 2 1/2 million women in all of our 50 States, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Panama--which all of you represent--are one of the most potent and effective grassroots lobbies we have for a peaceful and secure America, and I congratulate you for being here and for your never-ending efforts in this very high purpose.
But the good news is that they are focusing in on the problem, that they finally have decided in this--Democratic as well as Republican--that there is a problem, there must be some answers, and that they have to come up with either their solution or take mine and modify it or change it. The good news--and it is good news--we can argue about the differences, our solution or theirs, but the main point is that Congress now is beginning to realize they have to have an answer. What they are really doing is studying this, and if they do, I think they, as well as myself, will come pretty close to the same answer. That is important for the national security of the United States.
We are going to have a good program in our platform in 1976. It will be based on the concepts of the free enterprise system, continuation of a strong national security program, and a maximum effort to improve and make wholesome and healthy our economy.
I think these potential developments to some extent tend to validate the so-called domino theory, and if we have one country after another, allies of the United States, losing faith in our word, losing faith in our agreements with them, yes, I think the first one to go could vitally affect the national security of the United States.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is any necessary conflict between the Rockefeller Commission and the one or more Congressional committees. The Rockefeller Commission has been in operation now for a month or two, so they are underway.
They had planned to finish their work within the next months, as I recollect. They may have to go beyond that, depending on certain circumstances, but we intend to make as full a disclosure as is possible without jeopardizing America's national security.
I will insist (resist) every attempt by the Congress to add another dollar to this deficit by new spending programs. I will make no exceptions, except where our long-range national security interests are involved, as in the attainment of energy independence or for urgent humanitarian needs.
Serious problems confront the American people at home. Yet unemployment and the growth of the economy, as well as our national security, are directly related to the relations with the rest of the world.
Today, in the presence of three of my former colleagues, I renew the challenge to the Congress to enact before May 1 of this year a comprehensive energy program. It is essential to our national security, and it is more essential today than it was in January, when I proposed it.
The national interest and national security require as well that we reduce the dangers of war. We shall strive to do so by continuing to improve our relations with potential adversaries.
In a world where information is power, a vital element of our national security lies in our intelligence services. They are essential to our Nation's security in peace as in war. Americans can be grateful for the important but largely unsung contributions and achievements of the intelligence services of this Nation.
The national security budget that I have submitted is the minimum the United States needs in this critical hour. The Congress should review it carefully, and I know it will. But it is my considered judgment that any significant reduction, revision, would endanger our national security and thus jeopardize the peace.
We must guard our own national security and maintain the mutual strength of our alliances in Western Europe and in the Far East, keep our vital commitments to long-term friends, and keep pace in research and development of future defense systems if our recent progress toward reducing the dangers of war is to continue. Obviously, an essential element of our modern national security system is a sound intelligence system. And I do not intend to permit ours to be either publicized or paralyzed in times like these.
But let me say directly to each and every one of you that the United States is going to keep its commitments to its friends. The United States is telling its potential or real adversaries that they must not seek to take advantage. In order to help our friends and to meet any challenges from our foes, the United States is going to be strong in the field of national security.
It is a very risky business, but it is a very important part of our national security, and I don't think we should discuss--certainly I shouldn't discuss-specifics.
I am proud. I cherish the many times I have been with him on the floor of the House, in meetings concerning our national security. I cherish that relationship and the opportunity to have served with him. As I said earlier, I am even prouder to call him my friend, and I think this is really the feeling that all of us have here today, and we are fortunate to be sharing with one another.
Thank you very, very much.
Budget requests for construction subsidies will continue at approximately the same level in the next fiscal year. Expenditures for operational subsidies for United States flagships will climb--and, I think, appropriately--to a record high of $316 million. Our total Federal expenditures for Federal maritime programs--and bear in mind they are an integral, vital part of our total seagoing Navy--will be some $678 million as compared with a relatively smaller sum of about $500 million 2 years ago.
I give you my word that we will have a vital merchant marine in the future, and in the White House I will do as I did in the Congress, work for that objective for our national security.
In fact, the entire Navy-Marine Corps team has these very important, very vital ingredients: combat-proven strength, dynamic leadership, and dedicated professionalism. And we thank them all for these important assets that they contribute to our national security.
However good their intentions, those who claim that America is overarmed and overspending on defense are wrong. It is my very deep conviction we cannot afford to cut any further without endangering our national security. While our own military spending has been declining, others have not been idle. The Soviet Union, for example, is outspending us on defense by at least 20 percent.
Haven of peace and land of action, Tunisia, over the span of very few years, carried out substantial progress in a number of different areas. We feel that economic and social problems cannot be separated from national security considerations. The solution to be found to these problems is therefore the first line of defense. That is why employment, overall development and speeded-up development, and improving the standard of living are our priority objectives.
In this connection, Tunisia feels that the new economic order is a vital reed in order to raise the standard of living of hundreds of millions of men and women, and in order to exorcise the scourges of poverty, hunger, disease, and ignorance which weigh so heavily upon nearly half of mankind. Tunisia is convinced, not only for ethical and ideological reasons but because it feels deeply that this is the essential, the essential token for international security, and that this is indispensable for the development and the harmonious fulfillment of the individual human being. Tunisia is also convinced that mankind as a whole must and can make progress toward setting up this new economic order in a serene and concerted manner, not in a fruitless confrontation.
I believe that the Americans of 1975 are just as willing to pay that same price. That is why I continue to press for a comprehensive 10-year program to develop enough domestic energy to make the United States fully independent of foreign oil and externally fixed prices that threaten both our economic health and our national security. This could be another convincing demonstration to our allies and to our adversaries that Americans have lost neither their nerve nor their national will.
I'm optimistic that we can have a SALT II agreement, but I can assure you, as I have others, that we are going to make sure, make certain that our national security interest is very, very adequately protected, and I think it can be, as I look at the overall picture.
When I took office, or since I have taken office, I have discussed this change to maximize our flexibility and to give us the greatest opportunity for our own national security with Secretary Schlesinger, and I can assure you that it is a good
policy, and it is a policy that I think will help to deter war and preserve the peace.
So, in this case there has to be some push on the Congress from me, from the American people, to get off dead center and enact an energy program. Otherwise, we will be more and more vulnerable to foreign sources, and we can't afford that from the point of view of our country's national security, our country's economic prosperity.
I think there is enough money available for all of our essential programs to be adequately funded. And I think it is important for us to have your support in a completely strong, alert military organization, because if we don't have that kind of strength for national security, many of the other things we try to do cannot be sustained.
I spent 14 years of my 25 years in the Congress working on the defense appropriation bill, so I know a little bit about it. We had Secretaries of Defense come before that committee every year. We had all types of military personnel coming up to justify the budget, and we in those years provided an adequate military force to protect our national security. We didn't give them too much. We gave them enough, and the net result was, our security during a very difficult period was fully adequate for the defense of this country.
But at the same time, in dividing this Federal availability in the area of money, we have to have an adequate amount for our national security. I think if we do it right--and I think we will--the defense will be adequately funded, our people will be adequately supplied, and you who have great responsibilities out through 50 States will likewise get everything we possibly can to help you.
WELL, it is a great weekend in Michigan, of course--first, the Cherry Festival in Traverse City,1 and then coming up to Mackinac Island--with a tremendous opportunity to see Interlochen and to hear the wonderful music by the talented young people, and the inspirational efforts by all of those who follow in the best tradition of Dr. Maddy; but then to come to the Upper Peninsula and have an opportunity to see Kincheloe, which is a very important and vital installation in our overall national security setup.
Our economic well-being and our national security depend upon American control of the American economy. We cannot jeopardize our country's future by ducking the tough energy choices today. We must pay whatever the price is that is necessary to give us command of our own economic destiny.
THE PRESIDENT. As a result of some of the revelations, I appointed the Rockefeller Commission. That Commission conducted a very thorough investigation of the allegations concerning the CIA. That Commission has recommended to me certain administrative actions that I should take and some legislative proposals that I should submit to the Congress. My staff has taken the Rockefeller Commission recommendations and the Murphy Commission recommendations-and that Commission got into the CIA to some extent--and I intend to submit to the Congress specific proposals that I think will maintain the CIA and our total intelligence-gathering community so they can do the job which is essential for our national security on the one hand and at the same time preclude our intelligence-gathering agencies from violating our constitutional rights as individuals.
THE PRESIDENT. I think there has to be some improvement in this area, but I am not passing judgment on this program as to the specific recommendations I will make. We are now analyzing various proposals, and what the Congress does, of course, is their decision. But I can make recommendations as to how we can tighten up the control and at the same time give to the President and other people who have an interest the information on foreign intelligence which is so essential to our national security. You have to balance the two, and that is a very fine line. And I think we can do it. We are certainly going to try.
THE PRESIDENT. Martin, I think we have to understand we live in a real world. Every nation, either a friend or an adversary, has a comparable intelligence-gathering, intelligence-operating organization in their government. And they do it for their own national security.
Now, the United States has to compete in this real world. It's a tough world, and our national security on many occasions involves doing things in a covert way.
I can only assure you that if and when we undertake them under this Administration, they will be carefully monitored and they will be directly related to the national security of this country. I am not going to pass judgment on what other Presidents did. They were good men, whether they were Democrats or Republicans. They thought they were doing right. I can only pass judgment on what I want us to do, and those are the guidelines that we will follow.
[7.] MR. DUKE. Speaking of national security and foreign policy, Mr. President-and I must say parenthetically that you look very fit and relaxed for a man who just came back from Europe--nonetheless, your trip to Helsinki has encountered a substantial degree of hostility in this country, as you perhaps well know, and, rightly or wrongly, some people are suggesting that the Russians were the winners at Helsinki and we were the losers. What is your response to that criticism?
THE PRESIDENT. I have heard those arguments but I don't think they are valid. I think the Congress, or the House of Representatives in this case, made the most serious wrong decision since I have been in Washington, which is 27 years. The Congress was totally wrong--or the House of Representatives. Why do I say that? First, they haven't solved the Cyprus problem. Number two, they have weakened NATO. Number three, because of the Turkish aid embargo, they have lessened our own national security capability by preventing us from using intelligence-gathering installations in Turkey.
MR. DUKE. Are you saying Congress is harming our foreign policy?
THE PRESIDENT. There is no question about it. The decision of the House of Representatives to continue the Turkish arms embargo has seriously jeopardized our foreign policy and undercuts in a significant way our own national security, including that of NATO, and it hasn't solved--it has not solved the Cyprus problem.
To cushion the impact of sudden decontrol if the Congress sustains my veto-as it must--I will lift the special import fees on crude oil and petroleum products. If the Congress fails to sustain my veto and continues counterproductive price controls, I will have no other choice than to continue import fees. These fees were imposed in the first place to induce conservation and reduce consumption and our reliance on foreign oil, which is vital to our national security interests. It is incomprehensible to me that the Congress would jeopardize our ability to achieve energy independence at this critical hour.
THE PRESIDENT. I think, first, the attitude of young people today toward the military should be affirmative. After all, 2,100,000 people serve in the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines. They are the bulwark of our national security.
This is one place where second best is worth nothing. The proportion of Federal spending for national security and the proportion of our gross national product going for defense requirements have declined in recent years. The dollar figures in the Federal budget go up, but simply because of inflation. But the weapons we can purchase and the personnel we can afford have declined.
Our potential adversaries are certainly not reducing the levels of their military power. The United States, as a result, must be alert and strong, and it will be. The defense budget which I submitted for fiscal year 1976 represents, under these circumstances, the bare minimum required for our national security. I will vigorously resist all major cuts in every way I can, and I hope I have your help.
Thus, another essential element of any real arms limitation, whether of strategic systems or conventional forces, is our own intelligence capability. Sweeping attacks, overgeneralization against our intelligence activities jeopardize vital functions necessary to our national security. Today's sensations must not be the prelude to tomorrow's Pearl Harbor.
Intelligence in today's world is absolutely essential to our national security-even our survival. It may be even more important in peace than in war. Any reckless Congressional action to cripple the effectiveness of our intelligence services in legitimate operations would be catastrophic. Our potential adversaries and even some of our best friends operate in all intelligence fields with secrecy, with skill, and with substantial resources. I know and I know you know that what we need is an American intelligence capacity second to none.
Finally--and this relates both to our vital intelligence installations and to the imperative need to strengthen key alliances such as NATO--let us now consider our relations with our friend and ally of many years, Turkey. How do you explain to a friend and an ally why arms previously ordered and paid for are not being delivered? How do you explain to your other allies the potential damage that this may cause to our NATO alliance? How do you justify to the American people the loss of strategic intelligence data, with its attendant effect on our national security that this action has caused?
The United States, I can assure you, is going to be strong domestically in energy and our economy. The United States is going to be strong internationally. We will be a leader for peace in the future as we have in the past. But to do that, we must be strong at home and capable in our national security program.
We have also instituted what I call a no new program approach, which meant that any new program other than those affecting national security or energy would not be approved by me. I thought we should have a 1-year moratorium on new spending programs. So far, as best I can recollect, we have been able to preclude any new programs being initiated by the Congress, and we in the White House did not propose any.
Naturally, I thought of Seattle when I flew out in Air Force One. I suspect that was made--wherever the plant is--right here. [Laughter] It is a great aircraft. And of course, Seattle, with the Boeing Company, contributes very significantly not only to the aerospace industry as a whole but, very importantly, to our national security. And I compliment the company and particularly its employees for this contribution to our domestic as well as military security.
--first, to save American jobs;--second, to protect our future economic stability and our national security;--third, to assure that this Nation, after months and months of delay, achieves a comprehensive national energy program for future independence from foreign suppliers.
Secondly, related to that, you have got a great naval installation here in Portsmouth--one that is very significant from the national security point of view, one that is a very vital part of the economy of this part of New Hampshire. Let me speak very strongly that Louis Wyman in 1964 and again in 1972 almost single-handedly kept the Portsmouth Navy Yard open so we could have that' facility here defending or helping to defend the peace throughout the world.
Let me add, you elect Louis and he will have an opportunity to continue that strong support for this great navy installation which is such an integral part of our national security forces.
We also believe that the United States must be second to none in national security. We believe that our Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines must be strong. That is the best way to achieve the peace and to preserve the peace.
To keep this oil and to keep this natural gas flowing from this region, the Nation must make it economically feasible to search for new production and to develop methods. This is one of the major reasons that I believe decontrol of domestic oil prices is so essential to our national security.
That $25 billion could have provided more than 1 million jobs for unemployed Americans here at home. As American dollars pour out of our country, so does our economic stability and our national security.
The real danger to our economy is not the actions I propose, but the inaction that stifles more production here at home and increases our dependence on oil from abroad. That is the great danger--the loss of economic freedom by the United States of America, the reckless risk of placing our national livelihood and our national security in the hands of others.
THE PRESIDENT. I am not pessimistic at all that the American people will not respond. As a matter of fact, as I travel .around the country I find the American people are eager to cooperate. They can do it in a number of ways. The first is to impress upon their representatives in the Congress, Senators and Congressmen, that we have to move ahead, whether it is in energy, or the economy, or national security. I note a slight change in the attitude of the Congress, because I think the American people are having an impact.
THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to indicate that our Government is going to interfere with the internal operations of any government anyplace in the world. I think it is a matter that has to be carefully considered in the context of how it relates to our own national security. And to even imply that this country is going to get involved overtly or covertly, I think, is a mistake for the President of the United States.
In each case, regardless of the individual who was President, it was determined by responsible people that such action involved our national interest. I know there has been controversy about what has been done in one or more countries, but it is my judgment that if properly handled, and with a correct and a very certain relationship to our national security, we should not rule out responsible action in this area.
But to categorically rule it out or even to prescribe a specific limitation here, I think, would not be proper for the President of the United States. I am not ruling it out. I am not saying what we are going to do, except there have been some benefits, and if there are, related to our national security, I think we ought to do it.
All we can do is work at it. And I can pledge to you and to others we will do our utmost to make sure that detente is mutually beneficial to each country at no sacrifice of national security in either case and of tremendous, immense benefit to the world as a whole. We will do the very best we can.
I am an optimist, but it is a very serious matter. I am not going to be a participant in destroying the effectiveness of a good United States intelligence agency, because that involves our national security, period.
Yes, one more, I guess.
I commend you and compliment you for this superb work that you do to ensure the peace and maintain our national security.
Under no circumstances--and I want to be very clear on this--will I permit the dismantling or the destruction of an intelligence agency or community, because that does involve our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is any disharmony. On some occasions two very able people have some disagreements, but there is nothing that has seriously jeopardized the execution of our foreign policy or the carrying out of our national security program.
Five years ago the percentages were just about reversed, about 40-some percent for the military and roughly 28 or 29 percent for domestic programs. So, we have been putting a greater and greater emphasis out of our total resources in recent years for people, for cities, for States, for programs. And we have been cutting back a percentage of what we utilize for our national security as we protect our own interests and seek to help others as they are challenged throughout the world.
I want to work with the Congress and with you, the people, to ensure that those who deserve the help of our Nation continue receiving that help--the elderly, the poor, and the men and women who have borne our Nation's arms. Also, I will not permit reductions in our military budget that would jeopardize our national security. We must maintain a strong economy and a strong national defense.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me give a little background, if I might. For three administrations-President Johnson, President Nixon, and myself--negotiations have been going on with the Government of Panama concerning that problem. If you will refresh your memory, you will recall there were serious riots in Panama, I think in 1965. Around 30 people were killed, including some Americans. Now, these negotiations are going on. I have taken the position that we will not accept--and I would not recommend to the Senate--any proposal that interfered with the national security of the canal, that would interfere with the operations of the canal.
Now, I would not, under any circumstances, do anything in the negotiations or submitting proposals to the Senate that undercut our national security. Now, within those confines, these negotiations are going on. And I think it would be not wise for me to go into any of the details, because we have an outstanding negotiator down there who has instructions within those broad guidelines.
Obviously, in the process of reducing spending, a lot of belt-tightening will have to take place. But let me emphasize with conviction and very firm statements that those who deserve help will continue to receive it--the elderly, the poor, the veterans who have borne arms in our Nation's defense. And then I add hurriedly, we will not permit slashes in our national security defense forces that are necessary for the protection of the United States.
But Allied cooperation goes far beyond national security and defense. It reaches out to include new areas of energy cooperation and now intensive consultation to expedite our economic recovery.
This naval air station is a vital part of our total national security capability, and what you do here protects 214 million Americans. And on behalf of them, I thank you for your contribution.
So, it makes my job easier, it makes our country more secure to know that we have people like you serving in our national security forces.
Thank you very, very much.
First, with respect to foreign policy and national security affairs: You will recall that when I became President a year ago last August, I indicated that I believed it was essential to guarantee stability and continuity in the conduct of U.S. foreign policy. I made a conscious decision at that time not to change personnel in the important national security area. I have, however, made a number of significant changes in the Cabinet in the domestic area.
Therefore, I am tonight announcing several personnel changes which I believe will strengthen the Administration in the important area of national security affairs.
THE PRESIDENT. Let me assure you that my record in the Congress and as Vice President and as President has been one of strength in national security affairs, in international relations. I believe that in our attempt to ease tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States, we have achieved a two-way street, and I believe that the policy that I will follow, the team that I have, will continue that policy in the future.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, let me say very emphatically there is no one in this Government more emphatic for a strong national defense and the maintenance of our own national security than myself, Secretary Kissinger, and Don Rumsfeld, and many others who I could mention by name. From the top on down, we believe in strong national defense. And we have sought to implement it, and we need some more help in the Congress. I won't speculate on what Mr. Brezhnev might feel concerning these changes.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe that the decisions that I have made and the announcements that I have made officially give to me the people and the team and organizational structure to continue to carry out an affirmative, successful foreign policy on a global basis and to keep our national security forces second to none. I, therefore, feel very pleased with the acceptance on the part of individuals for these new responsibilities. They are important, not for me, but primarily for the country.
THE PRESIDENT. I felt it was very important at the outset because of the unusual circumstances under which I became President to have continuity, to have stability in the area of national security and foreign policy. That was absolutely essential. And as a result of that we continued a successful foreign policy.
But I have decided to talk about another topic, one of supreme importance to all Americans and indeed to the world, that is, the national security posture and policy of the United States as I see it.
The national security policy of this country--long a solid, nonpartisan policy and the policy which I have supported all of my life, some 25 years in the Congress--is that weakness invites war, that strength is the only sure foundation for peace, and that America, in concert with our allies, must maintain a defense capability second to none. That policy has not changed and will not change.
I reiterate this policy because there has been some criticism and speculation, following my announcement on Monday of several new appointments among my top national security advisers, that such personnel changes signal a policy change by the United States in this extremely important and sensitive area. I want to be absolutely sure that these domestic political potshots are not "heard round the world." Our allies and our adversaries must not be confused and misled. There will be no change in my lifelong devotion to America's strength and vigilance as we seek a safer and saner world.
In my judgment, that big a reduction is far too much. If the United States is going to remain strong, it will require the cooperation of the Congress. I deplore what the Congress has done to the defense budget to date, and I urge that the Senate restore the essential funds that the Defense Department has deemed vital to our national security. It is not just this year's cuts that worry me. Let's look at the trend.
An essential element to any real arms limitation, whether of strategic systems or conventional forces, is our intelligence capability. Sweeping attacks and exposes of intelligence activities jeopardize vital functions necessary to our national security. I did not take the sacred oath of office to stand by passively while the intelligence security of the United States is unilaterally dismantled.
But more importantly, because it involves all that we stand for, we are on the road to real progress overseas. We strengthened, as Ambassador Volpe knows, our relationships both militarily and economically in Western Europe. We made headway, despite a setback in Vietnam, in strengthening our ties in Japan and elsewhere out in the Pacific. We are making tremendous strides in the steps toward a just and permanent peace in the Middle East. We are moving forward in trying to find an answer to the problems between those behind the Iron Curtain and those on this side. We are going to push, under proper circumstances, for a way to lower our arms burden without interfering with our national security.
[5.] MR. WILL. Mr. President, you have nominated two very political men, Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Bush, to replace two apolitical men, Mr. Schlesinger and Mr. Colby, in sensitive national security positions. And this has caused Senator Jackson to wonder if you are surrounding yourself with yes-men and lackeys, and others are worried that national security advice to you will be politically colored by men who are perhaps interested in becoming your Vice-Presidential running mate in 1976. Might it help, both for the anxiety of the country and any possible Senate fight over these nominations, for you to say now that neither of those men will be your running mate in '76?
It is premature for me to indicate at this stage of the legislative process that I will veto or not veto. I will continue to work with Members of the House and the Senate to get as much military appropriation restored as possible, because the budget I submitted in January was a good budget that is needed and necessary for the national security of the United States. And I will work with the new Secretary and his associates to try and restore as much as I can of that budget cut that so far--roughly $7 billion.
MR. SPIVAK:. Mr. Broder [David S. Broder, Washington Post].
I am deeply concerned by the tendency of the Congress to spend for less essential items at the expense of defense. I refer specifically to a cut of over $7 billion in the new defense budget which I sent to the Congress in January of this year. This could weaken our hand at a time when we want no potential adversary to misjudge our resolve. It is the duty of the Senate to restore those funds that the Defense Department regards as essential and vital to our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. I repeat, under this Administration no agency of the Federal Government will plan or participate in any assassination plot of a foreign leader. The United States, however, in many cases for its own protection, its own national security, must undertake foreign covert operations, but I am not going to discuss the details of them.
TOM BROKAW. Mr. President, do you think that it is possible for you to make decisions in the name of national security if those decisions do not reflect the popular will of the people?
MR. BROKAW. Is that the situation now in Angola? Do you have to convince the American people of what you consider to be the national security of the United States there?
MR. BROKAW. Mr. President, in a recent speech, Secretary Kissinger said there is a gray area between foreign policy and national security which, he said, we deny ourselves at great risk to our national security. I suppose that training foreign mercenaries for use in Angola might be called part of that gray area. Are we training foreign mercenaries for use in Angola?
In formulating this budget, I have tried to achieve fairness as well as balance between the taxpayer and those who will benefit from Federal spending, between national security and other pressing needs, and between the desires to solve our problems quickly and the realization that for some problems, good solutions will take more time.
THE PRESIDENT. It relates precisely to our national security. We have had, over the last 10 years, a trend totally in the opposite direction. Ten years ago, the Department of Defense got, roughly, 40-some percent of the Federal outlays, and domestic programs got 32 or 33 percent. And in fiscal 1976, it was almost reversed. And if we are going to have an adequate national security, if we are going to have a capability in conventional or strategic arms, we have to increase our expenditures in fiscal 1977. It is just that our national security dictates it. We have been pinching the national security forces in the last 10 years. And I think we have to have a slight change in that direction.
I will ask Secretary Mathews to give you a more complete answer, but the Federal contribution to education is a relatively small part of the total that is Spent by States and local communities for education. So, the switch here I don't think is significant, particularly when the Federal Government has the total responsibility for our national security. And that is our prime obligation in this Complicated world in which we live.
David.
THE PRESIDENT. I think it's still in the R. &amp; D. stage. We haven't gone beyond that. We always are looking down the road to make sure that we don't rest on our oars. We know our adversaries are not. So, this is one of several programs that takes a look at the future and the need and necessity for the best weapons for our national security.
Bill, do you want to add any comment to that?
DEPUTY SECRETARY CLEMENTS. That's exactly right. I have nothing to add.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe that our ICBM's, the Minutemen, various versions, are a very strong deterrent and a very capable military weapon. We do have the Poseidon and the potential Trident. We have to have a mix. I think it is important not only to have land-based but submarine-launched missiles, ballistic missiles. But I think it is also important to have the manned aircraft, the B-52's and the B-l's that are coming along. We are going to be progressive. We are going to be flexible in our strategic weapon capability. It may mean moving to some version of mobile missiles. It may mean development, as we are, in the cruise missile area. We can't stay static. If we ever get on a plateau and stay there, our national security will be seriously in jeopardy.
We have arrested a spending trend that increasingly threatened our national security and our national stability. We are committed to keeping the level of Federal spending within reasonable and affordable limits, but we are also committed, and committed very deeply, to achieving a better and more bountiful life for all Americans.
In the State of the Union Message, in the budget that I submitted, and in the economic plan or program that was submitted to the Congress just a few days ago, we have tried to do in broad terms the following: number one, a proper balance between the Government on the one hand and the private sector on another; a better balance between the taxpayer on the one hand and those that receive Federal benefits on the other; a proper balance between the Federal Government and State and local units of government; and a proper balance between domestic programs which are essential and our national security.
In the budget that I submitted for fiscal year 1977, for the first time in the last 10 years we gave a slightly larger percentage of total Federal expenditures for our national security so that the defense of this country will be second to none.
As a result, I am fully aware of the tremendous effort, the tremendous teamwork that goes into it and all of the other intelligence reports that I receive that are so vital to the making of sound policy decisions on national security. And let me express my personal gratitude for this fine work.
Last fall--or the fall of 1974--I was in Arizona and saw the delivery of the first operational units of the F-16 IF-15]. And I can tell you that that meant a great deal, not only to those who were there in training but to all of us who know that that equipment is vitally important for our national security.
To deter war and to preserve our national security, we maintain the world's most efficient, alert, and best equipped armed forces. They are all volunteers. And we intend to keep it that way. And they serve in a very high state of readiness for the benefit of all of us. We remain the world's greatest democracy, symbolizing human aspirations for liberty as well as for progress.
We believe in ourselves and in our traditional values. Self-confidence in America is vital to our national security and survival. Acrimony and antagonism left over from another day only undermine our capacity to face the future with better results. Blind criticism is no better than blind faith. The President, acting in consultation with the Congress, must be able to maintain our world status from a position of strength. This is impossible unless we can speak to the rest of the world with one voice. American foreign policy is motivated by the will of the American people.
THE PRESIDENT. The United States needs, must have, for our national security in peace and/or in war, a very top-grade, the very finest intelligence community, whether it is the CIA or any one of the other organizations.
But our world has also become much more dangerous. It is also my duty to do all that I can to reduce the level of danger by diplomatic means. So, my policy for national security can be summed up in three words--peace through strength.
THE PRESIDENT. There just are not that many that want that, so you can't do it on a one-for-one basis. I am all for using our food, which our farmers produce in such quantities. And we are very lucky, because if we did not have the American farmer producing that food, we would have a horrendous adverse balance of payments with the oil we buy from the Arab nations. Now, we ought to use our food for two purposes: number one, for humanitarian purposes and, number two, we ought to use it for the execution or the supplementing of our own national security policies. And we are doing both of it, and we are going to continue doing it.
So, it is not something that I have jurisdiction over or the executive branch has jurisdiction over. If the Speaker will ask us to do anything within the law, we will do it to try and find out the person that I think has damaged our national security.
Thank you all very, very much.
The time has come for society to act in its own self-defense. I favor the use of the death penalty in the Federal criminal system in accordance with proper constitutional standards. The death penalty in appropriate instances should be imposed upon the conviction of sabotage, murder, espionage, and treason. Of course, the maximum penalty should not be applied if there is duress or impaired mental capacity or similar extenuating circumstances. But in murders involving substantial danger to the national security, or when the defendant is a coldblooded, hired killer, the use of capital punishment is fully justified.
Now, let me talk for just a minute about our national security. Bill and Lou and Skip, who I served with in the Congress, know of not only my experience in dealing with the Department of Defense but my dedication that the United States of America shall be second to none in national security.
Now, let me just talk about a question that has been raised by some people. At the present time, our Government is spending literally billions of dollars to make sure that we have enough nuclear capability to deter war and to protect our national security. The Soviet Union is spending as much, if not more. If we can put a cap on this arms race, I think that is in the best interests of this country. We are going to make sure and positive that it is a fair agreement. And your President is going to be a tough Yankee trader when he sits down, if he does, in trying to negotiate any such agreement.
Now we are going to put a maximum effort to maintain the capability of this country to deter war and to be able to maintain our national security against any threat. That means we have to spend a lot of money. It means we have to buy the best hardware, we have to provide the best training, and we have to give it public support. And that is what I am asking all of you to do. The Congress cannot and must not slash the Federal military budget this year.
So as we look across the domestic spectrum, I find a great reason for encouragement, even more so than I tried to say during the State of the Union Message about a month ago. But it does not do us much good to get things straightened out and problems corrected at home unless we are sure that our national security is in the right direction.
For example, I am recommending that the Attorney General proceed to work with the Congress to establish legislation for electronic surveillance so that he, representing the administration, would have to go to the court to get the authority even in national security matters. Under the present setup, the Attorney General can simply do it without going to the court if it involves national security. This is quite contrary to the impression that you raised with the question that you asked.
THE PRESIDENT. The United States has no plans for any first strike, but now let me answer the second question. The United States Government has been putting less and less of our resources into our national security for the last 10 years, and the net result has been that the percentage of the Federal funds that go to defense this year is 24 percent and social programs derive about 50 to 55 percent of the total Federal expenditures.
We have reached a point of diminishing return for several reasons. One, the Soviet Union, during the same period of time, has increased their expenditures out of their total government expenditures, their total GNP, and if we don't correct the situation--which I am trying to do and tried to do last year--the national security of this country will be in some jeopardy.
Last year I recommended a defense budget of about $100 billion, which was about 25 percent of the total expenditures by our Government for our national security. The Congress cut $7,200 million out of it. It was a mistake. This year I have recommended expenditures of $100.1 billion, which is for the second time in 10 years that a President has recommended a change in that curve.
If the Congress is wise enough to support my defense budget, we will spend roughly 25 percent of our total expenditures for our national security. I think that's right. You can't have the freedom in America unless you have the necessary military capability to deter war or to defend America.
Two other points. I know because of the close proximity of Portsmouth Naval Base that all of you, not only for that reason but because you are interested in national defense--I would like to say a word or two about national security and the Navy, particularly.
The facts are that in the last 2 years, I have submitted to the Congress and to the American people the two largest defense budget requests in the history of the United States in peacetime. Those requested appropriations for the best military personnel, the strongest weapons, the best planning by the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines, will give us the capability to deter war and to preserve our national security.
America has a great responsibility to keep it in the leadership that it has worldwide. We have a responsibility to deter aggression, to maintain peace, and to protect our national security. The only way we can do that is to have a sufficiently strong military capability so that our allies respect us and our adversaries know they hadn't better fool around.
Now let me just say that the United States is a country that is respected and admired. The United States is a country that is second to none in military capability. The United States has the strength to maintain the peace, to deter aggression, and to protect our national security. And we will never let it be different.
And if we continue the kind of defense budgets that I have recommended and if the Congress cooperates and doesn't slash them as they have in the past, America will have peace and freedom. We will deter war, and we will maintain our national security. Help me. The Congress needs to get the message.
But all of this money must be, as we see it, approved in fiscal '77 in order to maintain that mandatory rough equivalency with any other super power. We have it today, and we're going to keep it in the future in order to deter any aggression, to maintain the peace, and to protect our national security.
In my Presidency, I have proposed the two largest peacetime defense budgets in American history as the best assurance of deterring aggression and maintaining our own national security. There are some very sincere, very thoughtful, and very patriotic Americans who believe that these defense proposals take too much of our financial resources, take them away from domestic programs supported by the Federal Government. And I respect that view. But we must remember that the foundation for all of these domestic programs, the basic premise upon which they all depend is that the United States will continue as a free, independent, and secure nation. That must be our highest priority, and in this administration it is.
Our aim is to make peace secure throughout the world. We are conducting our foreign policy with our eyes open, our guard up, and our powder dry. We know that peace and national security cannot be pursued on a one-way street, but we also know that returning to a collision course in a thermonuclear age can leave the human race in ashes.
But let's take a minute to talk about national security. The United States today is second to none in military capability, and that's because we have the best weapons, we have the best personnel, we have the best aircraft, we have the best trained people. The United States is strong. It can handle the problem of deterring aggression, it can handle the problem of protecting our national security, and through strength we can maintain the peace.
But I have to warn you that if the trend that has gone on for the last 10 years, where we are spending relatively less a percentage of our overall Federal expenditures for national security and a correspondingly greater percentage of our total expenditures by the Federal Government for domestic programs-we will be in jeopardy.
Ten years ago, out of the total Federal expenditures, we spent roughly 42 percent for national security, and we spent about 31 or 32 percent for various domestic programs. Last year, we spent about 24 percent for national security and about 51 percent for all our domestic programs. Now, we can't tolerate that situation.
In January of this year, I submitted the biggest peacetime budget for the Defense Department in the history of the United States--$112.7 billion--the largest peacetime military budget in the history of the United States. But it's important, and Congress had better not cut it. They just can't, because while we, for the last 10 years were spending a corresponding lesser amount of our wherewithal in national security, the Soviet Union was adding to their expenditures.
It is well spent if we deter aggression, maintain the peace, and make certain and positive that our national security is secure. It is the best investment that we can make. And I urge all of my former colleagues and the new ones in the Congress and all of you to stand up and sell it to make sure that we have the necessary wherewithal so that no enemy will be tempted and no ally will be insecure. We have to have this kind of military capability, and I hope and trust from the bottom of my heart that we get the necessary weapons, the necessary training, the necessary planning, the necessary will in all 215 million Americans so that we don't have to worry. We just have to be strong in equipment as well as in will.
I am sure that Eddie Hebert feels as I do--we always did. We had a few differences on the floor of the House on occasion but that was good exercise for both of us. But the main point is that Eddie Hebert and I have--he as a Democrat and I as a Republican--we believed in the traditional bipartisan spirit in favor of national security. And I am an optimist to believe that that same spirit prevails today in the House as well as in the Senate--that even in an election year the need to maintain a strong national defense is more pressing than politics. It darn well better be.
I happen to have the belief that America will be kept great by the people here in Rockford, in Michigan, and Wisconsin and the other 47 States. All of us of an older generation know that we inherited from our forefathers a great country. They worked and they labored and they did much to make America the great country that it is. And as I look through this audience and see some of these wonderful young people and those Girl Scouts and others here of a younger generation, I think everybody who has a chance to participate in government-whether it is an elective office or a party worker or as a voter--feels a sense of obligation in the decade of the seventies to make sure that this country is good to these young people. These young people deserve what we inherited from our forefathers. It is our solemn obligation to keep us strong at home and to keep us strong so that we can deter aggression, so that we can keep the peace, so that we can meet a challenge against our national security.
Let me say this country is strong. We have a Department of Defense--the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, Marines--some 2,100,000 of them; some stationed here in the United States, many of them stationed around the world, who are alert, who are well-equipped, who are well-trained, who are welt-led. They are giving us the kind of security that protects America against aggression, preserves the peace, and protects our national security.
Peace through strength has been my constant goal as your President. And let me tell you what I mean by peace through strength--not with election year rhetoric but by the record. Let me define our national security policy not with words, but what we have actually done to advance peace in the world and to maintain strength at home. In my very first words after taking the solemn oath as President, I pledged an uninterrupted and sincere search for peace. I said America will remain strong and united, but its strength will remain dedicated to the safety and to the sanity of the entire family of man, as well as to our own precious freedom.
This year again I have gone to the Congress with another record peacetime defense budget request of $112.7 billion. My current defense budget request before the Congress at the present time reflects my determination to maintain America's defenses, both strategic and conventional, at the levels our national security requires. They include an increase in real dollars of $7.4 billion to buy new weapon systems, to continue to improve the readiness of our existing forces, and to increase selective forces while trimming off all the fat that we can.
One thing that my experience has taught me is that America needs strong defenses to keep it secure and at peace. I believe in peace through strength. If we are strong enough, we can deter aggression, we can maintain the peace, and we can take care of our national security against any challenge from any quarter. As a nation today, we are second to none in military strength. And I, with the help of the Congress, intend to keep it that way.
If you look at the trends that have been going on for the last 10 to 15 years in military expenditures, the facts are in constant dollars we have been spending less and less. That is a fact. But if we are going to be able to meet the challenges in any one part of the world and to deter aggression and to maintain the peace and to protect our national security, that trend line must be reversed.
That decision was not predicated on anything that had to be done immediately for our national security because we do have the best trained, the best equipped, the best led, the most alert military force in the history of the United States. That is what we have today. But the decision to add more spending to reverse the trend was to protect whoever might be President 3, 4, 5, 6 years from now because you don't turn a switch and all of a sudden have more missiles and more submarines and more aircraft, et cetera. The decisions made today in a defense budget materialize basically 2 to 4 to 5 years from now.
THE PRESIDENT. The budget that I submitted to the Congress in January, for the first time in 10 to 15 years, shows an increase in the proportion of Federal expenditures for national defense. And I would expect in the years ahead to do the same thing, and let me tell you why. The United States today is second to none, as I said in my prepared remarks, militarily. But for the last 10 or 15 years, the percentage of Federal expenditures for national security has gone down. The expenditures in real dollars for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines has gone down.
At the same time, the expenditures by the Soviet Union for their national security forces have gone up. Our position today is sound. We can deter aggression; we can keep the peace, and we can protect our national security. But if we don't approve the military budget that I submitted for the next fiscal year and the one that I will submit the next year--and all of them will be going up a bit-the national defense of this country could be in jeopardy.
Now, we have to get the Congress this year--instead of cutting national security as they have, instead of cutting the funds for the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines as they have been doing for the last 10 years, they have to approve the budget that I recommended this year, next year, and the following years, because we have to maintain our forces ready. They have to be well equipped, they have to be trained, and they have to be led. And that kind of a budget that I submitted will obtain those objectives.
But the main point I want to make is that we have to have adequate funding so we can buy new ships, so we can buy new weapons to protect the national security of America in the future as we have in the past.
THE PRESIDENT. I believe in capital punishment for very clearly defined criminal acts. In the Federal Government, I believe there should be capital punishment for espionage, for subversion, for things or acts that are against the national security of the United States. And in addition, I think capital punishment for kidnaping is a legitimate area.
Now let me say a word about our circumstances as we look around the globe, as we look at our national defense capability. There are some who want to downgrade America, who allege that we are weak, they don't know what they are talking about. And let me say it very firmly--America is strong today, and it is going to stay strong for our national security.
There have been some charges made that we don't have enough of this and enough of that. Let me just be very specific. In strategic capability we have more warheads, we have better accuracy, we have more strategic aircraft--America is fully capable of meeting any challenge under .any circumstances. We can deter aggression, we can keep the peace, and we can handle our problems of national security because America is strong. And let me assure you that under this administration this year and for the next 4 years we are going to stay strong because we have peace. And we are going to keep it because we are strong.
THE PRESIDENT. I categorically say that the United States is second to none militarily now, and if the Congress carries out my military budget for fiscal year 1977, we will continue to be second to none militarily. I think what you have to do is take a look at what we have, which is what our military leaders have told me, and previous Presidents, we need for our national security.
We have far more warheads. We have far better accuracy of our ballistic missiles. We have many, many, many more aircraft of a strategic capability-- B-52's, for example. We are in the process of acquiring the B-l's. If you look at the Navy, yes, the Soviet Union has more ships, but we have far, far more tonnage in capital ships because our naval leaders said that is what we needed for our national security. So, we tailor our national security programs based on what is needed for the United States to protect this country, to deter aggression, and to maintain the peace.
If we have that kind of a military program, with an improvement in our strategic as well as conventional forces, we can then negotiate from strength for whatever purposes we want, whether it is a SALT II agreement, whether it is in any of the other areas where it is in our national interest. So, if we get that kind of a defense budget through, many of our other problems, both from a national security point of view and from a foreign policy point of view, we will be in good shape.
But you can go around the world and the United States is in good shape. And we are in good shape because we are militarily strong; we have achieved peace; we are deterring any aggression that affects our national security.
THE PRESIDENT. The negotiations are going on. They have been going on under Mr. Johnson, under Mr. Nixon, and under ourselves. There are some very tough issues to be decided. We have not made progress in a meaningful way. We have a very good negotiator down there, and I can't tell you when there will be any conclusion of the negotiations, because the issues are tough. But let me emphasize and reemphasize that the United States, under this administration, will not do anything to jeopardize the national security of the canal
or the operations of the canal.
The United States has a national defense program second to none. The United States has sufficient military capability to deter aggression, to maintain the peace, and to protect our national security. So, any charges to the contrary are completely and totally inaccurate.
