And, finally, there's the problem of crime, a problem whose gravity cannot be underestimated. This administration has moved in its appointments to the Federal bench and in its legislative proposals for bail and parole reform to assist in the battle against the lawless. But we must always remember that our legal system does not need reform so much as it needs transformation. And this cannot occur at just the Federal level. It can really occur only when society as a whole acknowledges principles that lie at the heart of modern conservatism. Right and wrong matters, individuals are responsible for their actions. Society has a right to be protected from those who prey on the innocent.
The Congress also has before it now an omnibus crime bill whose provisions on bail reform, sentencing procedure, and criminal forfeiture are critical to our attempt to fight the growing problem of crime. We need that bill. It's critical to our efforts to control organized crime and the trade in illegal drugs and the street-corner criminals who promote that trade.
Now, these broadcasts are not popular with governments of totalitarian powers. But make no mistake, we have a duty to broadcast. Aleksandr Herzen, the Russian writer, warned, "To shrink from saying a word in defense of the oppressed is as bad as any crime." Well, I pledge to you that America will stand up, speak out, and defend the values we share. To those who would crush religious freedom, our message is plain: You may jail your believers. You may close their churches, confiscate their Bibles, and harass their rabbis and priests, but you will never destroy the love of God and freedom that burns in their hearts. They will triumph over you.
Now, we conservatives have been warning about the crime problem for many years, about that permissive social philosophy that did so much to foster it, about a legal system that seemed to specialize in letting hardened criminals go free. And now we have the means and the power to do something. Let's get to work.
Now, the exclusionary rule—that isn't a law that was passed by Congress or a State legislature, it's what is called case law, the result of judicial decisions. If a law enforcement officer obtains evidence as the result of a violation of the laws regarding search and seizure, that evidence cannot be introduced in a trial even if it proves the guilt of the accused. Now, this is hardly punishment of the officer for his violation of legal procedures, and it's only effect, in many cases, is to free someone patently guilty of a crime.
Well, this administration has proposed vital reforms of our bail and parole systems and criminal forfeiture and sentencing statutes. These reforms were passed by the Senate 95 to 1 last year. Our anticrime package never got out of committee in the House of Representatives. Do you see a target there? [Laughter] The American people want these reforms, and they want them now. I'm asking tonight that you mobilize all the powerful resources of this political movement to get these measures passed by the Congress.
It was C. S. Lewis who, in his unforgettable "Screwtape Letters," wrote: "The greatest evil is not done now in those sordid 'dens of crime' that Dickens loved to paint. It is not even done in concentration camps and labor camps. In those we see its final result. But it is conceived and ordered (moved, seconded, carried and minuted) in clear, carpeted, warmed, and well-lighted offices, by quiet men with white collars and cut fingernails and smooth-shaven cheeks who do not need to raise their voice."
Economic recovery, better education, rededication to values, all show the spirit of renewal gaining the upper hand. And all will improve family life in the eighties. But families need more. They need assurance that they and their loved ones can walk the streets of America without being afraid. Parents need to know their children will not be victims of child pornography and abduction. This year we will intensify our drive against these and other horrible crimes like sexual abuse and family violence.
Already our efforts to crack down on career criminals, organized crime, drugpushers, and to enforce tougher sentences and paroles are having effect. In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, the biggest decline since 1972. Protecting victims is just as important as safeguarding the rights of defendants.
Americans yearn to explore life's deepest truths. And to say their entertainment-their idea of entertainment is sex and violence and crime is an insult to their goodness and intelligence. We are people who believe love can triumph over hate, creativity over destruction, and hope over despair. And that's why so many millions hunger for your product—God's good news.
Over the past year, the United States Customs Service has increased by 200 percent its confiscation of obscene materials coming in across our borders. We're also intensifying our drive against crimes of family violence and sexual abuse. I happen to believe that protecting victims is just as important as safeguarding the rights of defendants.
Our mission stretches far beyond our borders; God's family knows no borders. In your life you face daily trials, but millions of believers in other lands face far worse. They are mocked and persecuted for the crime of loving God. To every religious dissident trapped in that cold, cruel existence, we send our love and support. Our message? You are not alone; you are not forgotten; do not lose your faith and hope because someday you, too, will be free.
The President. There are tasks that government legitimately should enforce and tasks that government performs well, and you've named some of them. Crime has come down the last 2 years, for the first time in many, many decades that it has come down--or since we've kept records--2 consecutive years, and last year it came down the biggest drop in crime that we've had. I think that we've had something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide.
The constitutional amendment proposed by President Reagan would make it a crime for a woman to have an abortion if she had been raped or suffered from incest. Is it really the view of the American people, however you feel on the question of abortion, that government ought to be reaching into your living rooms and making choices like this? I think it cannot work, won't work, and will lead to all kinds of cynical evasions of the law. Those who can afford to have them will continue to have them. The disadvantaged will go out in the back alley as they used to do.
Now, the example that the President cites has nothing to do with abortion. Somebody went to a woman and nearly killed her. That's always been a serious crime and always should be a serious crime. But how does that compare with the problem of a woman who is raped? Do we really want those decisions made by judges who've been picked because they will agree to find the person guilty? I don't think so, and I think it's going in exactly the wrong direction.
Of all the changes in the past 20 years, none has more threatened our sense of national well-being than the explosion of violent crime. One does not have to be attacked to be a victim. The woman who must run to her car after shopping at night is a victim. The couple draping their door with locks and chains are victims; as is the tired, decent cleaning woman who can't ride a subway home without being afraid.
We do not seek to violate the rights of defendants. But shouldn't we feel more compassion for the victims of crime than for those who commit crime? For the first time in 20 years, the crime index has fallen 2 years in a row. We've convicted over 7,400 drug offenders and put them, as well as leaders of organized crime, behind bars in record numbers.
In many areas—abortion, crime, pornography, and others—progress will take place when the Federal judiciary is made up of judges who believe in law and order and a strict interpretation of the Constitution. I'm pleased to be able to tell you that I've already appointed 284 Federal judges, men and women who share the fundamental values that you and I so cherish, and that by the time we leave office, our administration will have appointed some 45 percent of all Federal judges. And I know you share my satisfaction in the Supreme Court nominations of Justice William Rehnquist and Judge Antonin Scalia. I was especially delighted because, as some of you may know, Judge Scalia is the first Italian-American to be nominated to the Supreme Court in history.
No, I think the economic record of conservatives in power is going to speak for itself. But now let's turn to another area. For two decades we've been talking about getting Justices on the Supreme Court who cared less about criminals and more about the victims of crime, Justices who knew that the words "original intent" referred to something more than New Year's resolutions and fad diets. [Laughter] And then, 7 months ago a seat opened on the Supreme Court. And even before our first nominee was announced, a campaign was planned unlike any that has ever been waged for or against a judicial nominee in the history of our country. And let me acknowledge once again my admiration for one of the courageous defenders—not only in our time but in all time—of the principles of our Constitution, yes, of its original intent: Judge Robert Bork.
The great legal debates of the past two decades over criminal justice have, at their root, been debates over a strict versus expansive construction of the Constitution. The Constitution, as originally intended by the framers, is itself tough on crime and protective of the victims of crime. For so long, the liberal message to our national culture was tune in, turn on, let it all hang out. And now they see conservatives taking the lead as our nation says no to drugs and yes to family and absolutely to schools that teach basic skills, basic values, and basic discipline. And it's no wonder that our nation admires a man who believes in teaching values in education and talks turkey to teachers, parents, and educators, such as our Secretary of Education, Bill Bennett.
We've been not only undoing the damage of the past, we've put this nation on the upward road again. And in the process, the differences between the liberals and conservatives have become clear to the American people. We want to keep taxes low; they want to raise them. We send in budgets with spending cuts, and they want to ignore them. We want the balanced budget amendment and the line-item veto, and they oppose them. We want tough judges and tough anticrime legislation; they hold them both up in the Congress—you'd be surprised how many judges are waiting out there before they—so that they have to pass on them before they can take their office, and they've been waiting for months. We want a prayer amendment; they won't let it come to a vote in the House. We stress firmness with the Soviets; they try to pass legislation that would tie our hands in arms negotiations and endanger our defenses.
But that isn't all that putting our principles to work has meant for this nation we love. It's meant judges on the Federal bench across our country who know that every criminal is not a victim of society and that equal justice means justice for the victims of crime. It's meant a Federal Government that knows that the true measure of quality in education is in a simple, yet profound question that our good friend [Secretary of Education] Bill Bennett asks over and over again, to the great consternation of the National Education Association. He asks, "What works?"
Now, not everything we did can or should be measured in dollars and cents. "Justice is the end of government," wrote de Tocqueville. He said we would appoint judges who understood crime, criminals, and the Constitution; and we have. As our judicial appointees have begun to fill the bench, Federal sentences have grown a third longer than in 1980. And now on the Supreme Court and our appeals courts, we have more and more Justices and judges who appreciate the hardships of police work, who can see the distinction between the criminal and the victim of crime, and who know the difference between making the law and interpreting it.
And talking about crime, I think it's a crime that one of the best men ever nominated was kept off the United States Supreme Court: Robert Bork. But even so, who knows, maybe in the next few years, the courts will even figure out what the American people know: that the right to abortion is not in the Constitution and the right to pray, including for schoolchildren to pray, is.
In 1982 I announced to the Nation that we were going to go after the mob like no other administration in history. Within a few years, organized crime convictions had quadrupled. Today we have the mob on the ropes. We're going to keep them there. Yes, we launched a war on organized crime and on drugs. Federal drug convictions have nearly tripled. Cocaine seizures are up 1,800 percent. And it seems as if almost every week, of late, brings news of another international roundup of gangsters.
We will make specific proposals and we will solicit other ideas. In the area of crime, where we have double our proportionate share, we will propose legislation to give back to local communities the right to pass and enforce ordinances which will enable the police to more adequately protect these communities. Legislation already drafted will be submitted, calling upon the Legislature clearly to state in the future whether newly adopted laws are intended to preempt the right of local governments to legislate in the same field. Hopefully, this will free judges from having to guess the intent of those who passed the legislation in the first place.
When fiscally feasible, we hope to create a California crime technological foundation utilizing both public and private resources in a major effort to employ the most scientific techniques to control crime. At such a time, we should explore the idea of a state police academy to assure that police from even the smallest communities can have the most advanced training. We lead the nation in many things; we are going to stop leading in crime. Californians should be able to walk our streets safely day or night. The law abiding are entitled to at least as much protection as the lawbreakers.
While on the subject of crime – those with a grievance can seek redress in the courts or Legislature, but not in the streets. Lawlessness by the mob, as with the individual, will not be tolerated. We will act firmly and quickly to put down riot or insurrection wherever and whenever the situation requires.
With the entire nation plagued by runaway crime rates and bulging prisons, our major California cities report a reduction in crimes of violence.
Now, as long as they do that and as long as they, at the same time, have openly and publicly declared that the only morality they recognize is what will further their cause, meaning they reserve unto themselves the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, in order to attain that, and that is moral, not immoral, and we operate on a different set of standards, I think when you do business with them, even at a detente, you keep that in mind.
Samuel Gompers, who founded the American Federation of Labor and who literally gave his life to that cause, said, "Doing for people what they can and ought to do for themselves is a dangerous experiment. In the last analysis the welfare of the workers depends upon their own initiative. Whatever is done under the guise of philanthropy or social morality which in any way lessens initiative is the greatest crime that can be committed against the toilers. Let social busybodies and professional public morals experts in their fads reflect upon the perils they rashly invite under the pretense of social welfare."
We've gone astray from first principles. We've lost sight of the rule that individual freedom and ingenuity are at the very core of everything that we've accomplished. Government's first duty is to protect the people, not run their lives. What have been some of the results of this straying from basic principles? Well, for one, violent crime has surged 10 percent, making neighborhood streets unsafe and families fearful in their homes. We've been left with a legacy of almost 8 million people out of work—666,000 of them construction workers. All of these people have been robbed of a basic human dignity and forced into the humiliation of unemployment. The annual inflation rate has soared to nearly 12 percent, making a mockery of hard work and savings. And our national debt has grown to more than $950 billion despite taxes that eat up an ever-increasing share of the family dollar.
In fact, if anything, I'm a little disturbed that focusing on gun control as an answer to the crime problem today could very well be diverting us from really paying attention to what needs to be done if we're to solve the crime problem.
Ms. Thomas. Which is?
The President. Well, we had a very nice talk. And I told him that I believe that some of the things that we had tried in California served better, and that is to make the penalties for the carrying of a weapon, particularly in the commission of a crime, much stiffer than they are. California—we added 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence for anyone carrying a gun in the commission of a crime—convicted of that crime, whether they used the gun or not. And since, that's been augmented to include no probation—mandatory prison sentence.
So, I would like to see us directing our attention to what has caused us to have the crime that continues to increase as it has and is one of our major problems in the country today.
Now, how important is that? Let me just tell you something. Only one year while I was Governor did we have a majority in both houses of the legislature, and it was barely a one-vote majority. But in that one year where we could create the majority in the committees by being the majority party, in the criminal justice committee of the Assembly, 41 crime-fighting bills came out of that committee to the floor where they were successfully voted into action in California.
Just recently you saw where that same criminal justice committee, now in the hands of the other party, killed in committee several crime-fighting bills. We found, if they ever get to the floor, then Democrat and Republican, out there in the open, they have to vote for them. But they can be killed in that committee, and they were.
Now, those same crime-fighting bills, just like the 41 in our time, those same crime fighting bills can come back again if in '82 we get the majority. And then it'll be a Republican majority in the committee and those bills will reach the floor and they'll become tools that we need to restore law and order here in our neighborhoods and in our cities and our homes. So, I hope that you will all do everything you can to get that legislative majority and then, of course, to get the administration that goes with it.
The other day just coming out here, I picked up the paper and read where in the assembly criminal justice committee, five crime-fighting bills were buried and killed in committee, never got to the floor for a vote. Well, the party that is in the majority names the majority and the chairmen of the committees. And just 1 year, while I was Governor, we had a majority. It was a bare majority. In that I year, 41 anticrime bills came out of that committee to the floor, and even the opponents didn't dare vote against them once they were on the floor. That's what can happen.
There's a lady down here that—
We forget this at our peril. In these recent years when advocates of collectivism and government intervention have held sway, we should recall the wisdom of that greatest of labor statesmen, the founder of the American labor movement, Samuel Gompers. He said, "Doing for people what they can and ought to do for themselves is a dangerous experiment. In the last analysis, the welfare of the workers depends on their own initiative. Whatever is done under the guise of philanthropy or social morality which in any way lessens initiative is the greatest crime that can be committed against the toilers. Let social busybodies and professional 'public morals experts' in their fads reflect upon the perils they rashly invite under this pretense of social welfare."
His partner in crime on the doubles court, Wimbledon and U.S. Open Doubles Champion, Peter Fleming. Former Wightman Cup player, now Wightman Cup captain, Rosie Casals.
In preparing these remarks, I hart an opportunity to go back and look over some of the comments I've made to law enforcement officials on other occasions. The topic of those discussions was a subject with which you have more than a passing familiarity—the steady, ominous growth of crime in our Nation.
In one speech some years ago in Los Vegas, i once wondered about what was happening to America, and I noted the fear and the anger of the citizenry as they locked themselves in their homes or refused to walk the streets at night. I spoke, too, about a phenomenon known as the "youthful offender," the astonishing percentage of crimes that they were estimated to be responsible for.
Then there was a speech in Dallas where I mentioned the effect of narcotics on the crime rate and the appalling estimates that drug addicts were responsible for the economic increase of certain crimes.
You're familiar enough with the statistics. The cases that make them up cross your desk every day. In the past decade violent crime reported to police has increased by fifty-nine percent. Fifty-three percent of our citizens say they're afraid to walk the streets alone at night. Eighty-five percent say they're more concerned today than they were 5 years ago about crime.
Crime has continued on the upswing. It has gone on regardless of the efforts that we make. crime has increased in that thing that I mentioned, of the youthful offender, between 18 and 21. And that other problem I mentioned years ago, the incredible impact of drug addiction on the crime rate, continues. Studies of prison inmates have found that at least half admitted to using drugs in the month prior to their arrest. And it's still estimated that 50 to 60 percent of property crimes are drug-related.
From these statistics about youthful offenders and the impact of drug addiction on crime rates, a portrait emerges. The portrait is that of a stark, staring face, a face that belongs to a frightening reality of our time—the face of a human predator, the face of the habitual criminal. Nothing in nature is more cruel and more dangerous.
Study after study has shown that a small number of criminals are responsible for an enormous amount of the crime in American society. One study of 250 criminals indicated that over an 11-year period, they were responsible for nearly half a million crimes. Another study showed that 49 criminals claimed credit for a total of 10,500 crimes. Take one very limited part of the crime picture, subway crime in New York City: The transit police estimate that 500 habitual offenders are actually responsible for 40 percent of those offenses.
Now, I fully realize that the primary task for apprehending and prosecuting these career criminals, indeed, for dealing with the crime problem itself, belongs to those of you on the State and local level. But there are areas where the Federal Government can take strong and effective action, and today I want to outline for you some of the steps that we're going to take to assist you in the fight against crime.
First, this administration intends to speak out on the problem of crime. We will use this, what Teddy Roosevelt called a "bully pulpit" of the Presidency, to remind the public of the seriousness of this problem and the need to support your efforts to combat it. I believe that this focusing of public attention on crime, its causes, and those trying to fight it, is one of the most important things that we can do.
Second, in talking out about crime, we intend to speak for a group that has been frequently overlooked in the past—the innocent victims of crime. To this end I will soon be appointing a Task Force on the Victims of Crime to evaluate the numerous proposals now springing up regarding victims and witnesses. We will support legislation that will permit judges to order offenders to make restitution to their victims. The victims of crime have needed a voice for a long, long time, and this administration means to provide it.
—U.S. attorneys will seek to establish law enforcement coordinating committees, which will be composed of the district heads of Federal agencies as well as key State and local officials. These committees will stimulate an exchange of views and information that will lead to a more flexible, focused, and efficient attack against crime.
—We will seek to extend the cross-designation program now working with success in several localities. These programs permit Federal, State, and local prosecutors to enter each other's courts and grand jury rooms to pursue investigations and prosecutions of serious crimes when they cross jurisdictional lines,
—To this end we will be working with the Congress to achieve a sweeping revision of the Federal Criminal Code. This matter is now pending before both Houses. A revised Criminal Code will help in our fight against violent crime, organized crime, narcotics crime, and fraud and corruption. I cannot stress too strongly the need for prompt passage of legislation that revises the Federal Criminal Code, and this will be the foundation of an effective Federal. effort against crime.
—We will push for bail reform that will permit judges, under carefully limited conditions, to keep some defendants from using bail to return to the streets, never to be seen in court again until they're arrested for another crime.
—We also support the reform of the exclusionary rule. I don't have to tell you, the people in this room, that this rule rests on the absurd proposition that a law enforcement error, no matter how technical, can be used to justify throwing an entire case out of court, no matter how guilty the defendant or how heinous the crime. The plain consequence of treating the wrongs equally is a grievous miscarriage of justice. The criminal goes free, the officer receives no effective reprimand, and the only ones who really suffer are the people of the community.
—We will ask for revision of the Tax Reform Act that will make it easier for Federal departments to cooperate in making income tax cases against major organized crime figures and drug pushers.
Fifth, one of the single most important steps that can lead to a significant reduction in crime is an effective attack on drug trafficking. Let me outline the major points in our narcotics enforcement strategy:
Sixth, violent crime is a major priority. But we fully understand that crime doesn't come in categories; all crime is related, and an effective battle against street crime can hardly be waged in a vacuum. The street criminal, the drug pusher, the mobster, the corrupt policeman or public official—they form their own criminal subculture; they share the climate of lawlessness. They need each other; they use each other; they protect each other.
We will continue to focus Federal efforts on sophisticated forms of crime, similar to those emphasized by the FBI under Judge Bill Webster. And that's why I want to say a word today to those Federal agents and prosecutors who have done so much in recent years to expose the problem of organized crime and public corruption. The existence of syndicates of highly organized criminals and public officials who peddle their sacred trust are blots on American history. I can assure you, no administration has ever been more anxious to work toward wiping away these blots. So, to those in the field who fight this frustrating, sometimes disheartening battle against highly sophisticated forms of crime: This administration stands behind you.
In discussing these forms of sophisticated crimes, we see again the emergence of the problem of career criminals—those who make a conscious decision to pursue illicit professions, a decision based on a belief that crime does pay. I believe the emergence of this problem of career criminals has seriously undermined the notion that criminals are simply products of poverty or underprivileged backgrounds.
At the very same time that crime rates have steadily risen, our nation has made unparalleled progress in raising the standard of living and improving the quality of life. It's obvious that prosperity doesn't decrease crime, just as it's obvious that deprivation and want don't necessarily increase crime. The truth is that today's criminals for the most part are not desperate people seeking bread for their families; crime is the way they've chosen to live.
Well, let's face it: There is an arrogance to the criminal mind, a belief in its own superiority over the rest of humanity. The slang of organized crime is instructive here. It isn't surprising that some of these criminals habitually refer to themselves as "wise guys," and the honest people are "working stiffs." They do really believe that they're better than the rest of us, that the world owes them a living, and that those of us who lead normal lives and earn an honest living are a little slow on the uptake.
What is especially disturbing about our failure to deal with crime is the erosion it has caused in public confidence in our judicial system. In one recent poll, 70 percent of the people said they had little or no confidence in the ability of our courts to sentence and convict criminals.
Let me quote what one lawyer-policeman had to say recently about how criminal eases are handled today. He said, "In the criminal courts, eases are being trivialized in ways independent of the evidence." New York Police Commissioner Robert McGuire recently said, "Instead of the system being geared to treat each individual case as a manifestation of antisocial behavior, the main impetus is to dispose of it. No one is talking about the morality of crime."
Commissioner McGuire has put his finger on the problem. Controlling crime in American society is not simply a question of more money, more police, more courts, more prosecutors; it's ultimately a moral dilemma, one that calls for a moral or, if you will, a spiritual solution. In dealing with crime, new programs may help; more law-and-order rhetoric may be justified; the studies and surveys may still be needed; the blue ribbon panels may keep investigating. But in the end, the war on crime will only be won when an attitude of mind and a change of heart takes place in America, when certain truths take hold again and plant their roots deep in our national consciousness, truths like: Right and wrong matters; Individuals are responsible for their actions; Retribution should be swift and sure for those who prey on the innocent.
Many of the social thinkers of the 1950's and '60's who discussed crime only in the context of disadvantaged childhoods and poverty-stricken neighborhoods were the same people who thought that massive government spending could wipe away our social ills. The underlying premise in both eases was a belief that there was nothing permanent or absolute about any man's nature, that he was a product of his material environment, and that by changing that environment—with government as the chief vehicle of change through educational, health, housing, and other programs—we could permanently change man and usher in a great new era.
It's time, too, that we acknowledge the solution to the crime problem will not be found in the social worker's files, the psychiatrist's notes, or the bureaucrats budgets. It's a problem of the human heart, and it's there we must look for the answer. We can begin by acknowledging some of those permanent things, those absolute truths I mentioned before. Two of those truths are that men are basically good but prone to evil, and society has a right to be protected from them.
The massive expansion of government is related to the crime problem in another, less obvious way. Government interference in our lives tends to discourage creativity and enterprise, to weaken the private economic sector, and preempt those mitigating institutions like family, neighborhood, church, and school—organizations that act as both a buffer and a bridge between the individual and the naked power of the state.
In the last month, there was a radio address to the Nation on Labor Day, a TV address on the economy, a news conference that covered the waterfront of issues. I've had an opportunity to do some traveling, to talk to union members in Chicago about the housing industry, to help get Westway started in New York City, assist at the dedication of President Ford's museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and to talk to the Republican women leaders in Denver about Wall Street and Main Street. Last week in New Orleans, I announced some major initiatives on crime and also spoke to the World Bank conference about our new development policy. And when I leave you—and I regret that I have to be here so briefly—I'm going to be speaking to the National Alliance of Business about mobilizing the private sector to assist the underprivileged.
Finally, let me just say a word about a fourth kind of principle—the one that teaches us there really is a difference between right and wrong. I think it's time we took a good look at this moral side of contemporary schooling. How, for example, can we expect to restore educational excellence in schools still plagued by drug abuse and crime and chronic absenteeism?
Take the preventive detention, which is a name put upon a bail provision. The Constitution provides that bail shall be reasonable. What we're suggesting, what the Attorney General's task force has brought up, is that there would be a reasonable standard of bail. And we think that to take a person who has proved, by committing another crime while out on bail for a first crime, that they should be let out on bail again and again, we don't think that's reasonable. So, we're looking for some modifications of bail, to look at the protection of society, along with the ability of people to get out prior to their trial.
You know, as an ex-Democrat myself, I never cease to be amazed at how conservative liberals can sound during election years. Well, Marshall Coleman not only sounds conservative, he is conservative in the finest meaning of that word. He understands how to deal with crime and how to keep budgets under control. He's got the experience and the qualifications to do the job. I'm looking forward to working closely with him once he's elected Governor of the State of Virginia, just as I have with Governor John Dalton.
So, too, the problem of crime—one as real and deadly serious as any in America today. It demands that we seek transformation of our legal system, which overly protects the rights of criminals while it leaves society and the innocent victims of crime without justice.
We need all of you now more than ever. I have always believed that this country—not always, but in recent years, I should say, believed that this country is hungering for a spiritual revival. I believe we need to build on what they're doing in Atlanta, where local churches have spearheaded a community effort, thousands of citizens, to help fight crime by serving as extra eyes and ears for the Atlanta police department, no longer turning their head away and saying, "I don't want to get involved."
The people of the world owe a special debt of gratitude to diplomats and their families, who today must cope not only with the frustrations inherent with the profession, but also with personal danger. In the last 15 years, diplomats from over a hundred countries have been victims of terrorist attacks. Fortunately, most have survived those attacks; a few, tragically, have not. Those who perpetrate these dastardly acts should never doubt that every nation considers an attack on any diplomat as a crime against mankind which will not be tolerated in any land.
In recent years, this tradition has come under increasing attack from terrorists who seek to strike at governments through their diplomatic representatives. In the last 15 years, diplomats from over 100 countries have been victims of terrorist attacks. Fortunately, most have survived these attacks; a few, tragically, have not. Those who perpetrate these cowardly acts should never doubt that every nation considers an attack on any diplomat a crime against mankind which will not be tolerated in any land.
And, finally, there's the problem of crime, a problem whose gravity cannot be underestimated. This administration has moved in its appointments to the Federal bench and in its legislative proposals for bail and parole reform to assist in the battle against the lawless. But we must always remember that our legal system does not need reform so much as it needs transformation. And this cannot occur at just the Federal level. It can really occur only when society as a whole acknowledges principles that lie at the heart of modern conservatism. Right and wrong matters, individuals are responsible for their actions. Society has a right to be protected from those who prey on the innocent.
You know, the people that are complaining the loudest because now, yes, this recession which came upon us and was coming upon us for the last several years has increased what even our conservative estimates of the deficit was going to be, because every time you add 1 percent to the unemployment rolls, you add 25 to 27 billion dollars to the deficit. And yet, I don't recall any of them in those past years, when they were in control of both Houses of the Congress, ever protesting much about deficits. It seems to me that I remember hearing them say, "Oh, we don't have to worry about the national debt. We owe it to ourselves." And I remember them saying, "A little inflation each year is good for us. It maintains prosperity." Well, listening to the born-again budget-balancers moan about deficits now is kind of like hearing a mugger in Central Park complain about crime in the streets. [Laughter] I don't believe that I was sent to Washington to raise your taxes, and neither was the new majority in the United States Senate.
The cochairmen of this computer matching committee are a story in themselves. One of them is Dick Kusserow, a young FBI agent from Chicago brought here by Secretary Schweiker to be Inspector General at the Department of Health and Human Services. Dick had gained a reputation as one of the bureau's best experts on fraud against the government and organized crime cases. During his first 9 months in office here, he's come up with more than $230 million in estimated savings and prosecutions for fraud. Those prosecutions are already up over last year.
The other cochairman is Tom McBride, a dedicated prosecutor whose career moved him from the Manhattan District Attorney's office to the Kennedy Justice Department. His audits have found serious fraud and waste in CETA and other Labor Department programs. His recent drive against fraud and abuse in the Federal Employee Disability program brought more than 50 indictments in the last year alone. And, for the first time, really, Tom McBride is moving ahead with a program that will employ the rarely used powers of Federal statutes like the Rico Act to fight organized crime and infiltration into legitimate unions.
But I believe in California that we took the path of gun control that was best. I don't believe there's any way you can keep the criminal from getting a gun, just as you can't keep them from trying to steal anything they want. Now, the law that we passed in California, I heartily recommend to any society. We passed a law that said if a criminal is convicted of a crime and had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used it or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence. And on top of that, then passed another law that said no judge can find a prisoner guilty who had a gun in the commission of a crime, and then give him probation. He must go to prison. And I think making it so costly to carry a gun is far more enforceable than trying to keep them from getting it.
Today the President is creating a task force to study the problems of those who are victimized by crime. He is doing so because of his deep concern for these often forgotten citizens.
Crime is a problem of major concern in America. We confront a situation in which people are afraid to be on the streets, and they are afraid in their homes where they expect to feel safe. The problems of crime and the victims left in its wake exist in every community and cut across every age, ethnic, and economic line. We must find a practical, effective, and humane way to deal with this crippling problem. It's clearly one which has many dimensions and which must be addressed in many different prospectives.
But mostly, we want to hear from those who are our chief concern: the victims of the crime. Determining how best to deal with the victims and helping them through the first shock of the attack, protecting and guiding them through an often impersonal and threatening court system, ensuring that they have a chance to be heard, and helping to ensure they won't be harmed again is an enormous task and enormous challenge.
Well, as Lois has just told us, the innocent victims of crime have frequently been overlooked by our criminal justice system, and their pleas for justice have gone unheeded and their wounds—personal, emotional, and financial—have gone unattended. So, I'm signing today an Executive order establishing the President's Task Force on Victims of Crime.
This task force, which will involve both government officials and distinguished private citizens, will conduct a thorough review of national, State, and local policies and programs that affect victims of crime. It'll report later this year to me and to the Attorney General on how we can expand and improve our efforts at all levels of government to assist and protect our fellow citizens who are victimized by lawlessness.
Our concern for crime victims rests on far more than simple recognition that it could happen to any of us. It's also rooted in the realization that regardless of who is victimized or the extent to which any one of us may personally be threatened, all of us have an interest in seeing that justice is done not only to the criminal but also for those who suffer the consequences of his crime.
The Constitution that I'm sworn to uphold speaks in its first sentence of the importance of ensuring domestic tranquillity for our citizens. Consistent with that responsibility, I'm committed to elevating and improving our efforts on behalf of victims of crime. This task force is designed not simply to demonstrate our concern but to make a swift, serious, and substantial contribution to solving the problem.
What we did in California is what I recommend is the answer. We passed a law when I was Governor that said that anyone who commits a crime, if he had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used the gun or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence—and no probation, he had to go to prison. And I think that might take some of the guns out of the pockets of the criminals.
With protection of young people in mind, Bill declared war on crime and went on the offensive against drugs. And finally, a subject close to my heart: Bill Clements has been one of the most responsive Governors in the 50 States in our efforts to promote voluntarism. Building on that frontier spirit for which Texas is famous, he has been encouraging people to get involved, to help one another, to take more responsibility for their family and community. He's promoted the use of volunteers and direct citizen involvement in mental health and human resource programs.
At the level of government you deal with, the daily lives of your citizens, managing their schools, repairing their roads, protecting their neighborhoods from fire and crime—of course, Washington involves itself in these things too, but too often that kind of Federal intrusiveness has become part of the problem, not the solution.
The President. Well, you don't have to limit it to a President. This defense is being used more and more in murder trials. And we've seen, I think, something long before this trial that led to the study of this question, with the incidence of people found innocent by reason of insanity put in a mental hospital and turned loose, you might say, virtually by the members of the same profession that had gone into court and proved they were insane, then a few months later telling them they were cured. And we've had the double tragedy of they go right out in the street and commit the same crime over again.
The Congress also has before it now an omnibus crime bill whose provisions on bail reform, sentencing procedure, and criminal forfeiture are critical to our attempt to fight the growing problem of crime. We need that bill. It's critical to our efforts to control organized crime and the trade in illegal drugs and the street-corner criminals who promote that trade.
But let me just give you an example if I can—and then I'm going to do something else here—an example of what this man has in his background and what he has done for the State of California. For about 7 of the 8 years I had a hostile legislature. The opposing party had a majority in both houses. Now, maybe many of you haven't thought about this, but in the structure of government the party that has the greatest number of members of the assembly and of the senate in each case has the majority of each committee and names the chairmen of those committees. Well, one year, due to some special elections, we wound up with a bare majority in both houses. And that year, now that we had the majority in the committees and the chairmen of the committees, out of one committee that was literally a burial ground for good legislation came 41 anticrime pieces of legislation. Almost all of them, if not all, were authored by this man.
They had been buried in that committee as long as the other fellows were in charge, and they came out of that committee to the floor, and then once out on the floor even the other side that had bottled them up in committee—where they could be kind of anonymous in doing it—didn't have the nerve to vote against them. And in that 1 year we passed 41 pieces of anticrime legislation.
And the polls that not too long ago said that inflation was the number-one problem-they don't say that anymore, because inflation for the last 7 months has been running at 5.4 percent, not 12.4 percent. I just wanted to get in that lick because— [laughter] —because I also wanted to emphasize that now, near the top if not the top of many polls, the problem on people's minds is crime. And I think the moment has come when a man with the experience, George Deukmejian, should be the Governor of the State of California.
Today I want to talk with you about a subject that's been very much on my mind, even as we've been busy with budgets, interest rates, and legislation. It's a subject I know you've been thinking about too— crime in our society.
Many of you have written to me how afraid you are to walk the streets alone at night. We must make America safe again, especially for women and elderly who face so many moments of fear. You have every right to be concerned. We live in the midst of a crime epidemic that took the lives of more than 22,000 people last year and has touched nearly one-third of American households, costing them about $8.8 billion per year in financial losses.
During the past decade alone, violent crime rose by nearly 60 percent. Study after study shows that most serious crimes are the work of a relatively small group of hardened criminals. Let me give you an example-subway crime in New York City. Transit police there estimate that only 500 habitual criminal offenders are responsible for nearly half the crimes in New York's subways last year.
It's time to get these hardened criminals off the street and into jail. The primary responsibility for dealing with these career criminals must, of course, rest with local and State authorities. But I want you to know that this administration, even as it has been battling our economic problems, is taking important action on the Federal level to fight crime.
As Attorney General Smith pointed out recently, an important part of the problem is that Americans are losing faith in our courts and our entire legal system. Nine out of 10 Americans believe that the courts in their home areas aren't tough enough on criminals. Another 8 out of 10 Americans believe that our criminal justice system does not deter crime. And these figures have gone up drastically in the last 10 or 15 years.
We can and must make improvements in the way our courts deal with crime. The administration-backed omnibus anticrime bill, introduced in the Congress last year and given important leadership by men such as Senator Thurmond, would help to achieve this vital goal by cracking down on hardened criminals through important legal reforms. These include revising the bail system so that dangerous offenders, and especially big-time drug pushers, can be kept off our streets.
We also want to stop abuse of the parole system by making jail sentences more certain. And we've been pushing for stronger criminal forfeiture laws, a powerful weapon that would take a lot of the profit out of drug pushing and other forms of organized crime. We've also asked the Congress for tougher Federal penalties for drug trafficking.
Other important legislation would require a judge to take into account the suffering of the victim when it comes time to sentence a criminal, would make it a Federal crime to kill, kidnap, or assault senior Federal officials, and would extend the ability of the Federal Government to transfer property to the States, free of charge, for use as prison facilities.
These are important and imaginative steps. They can strike a real blow against organized crime and professional criminals. Unfortunately, they have yet to be passed by the Congress.
The day after tomorrow, Monday, I will send to the Congress another package of major anticrime measures. These will include suggested revisions of the exclusionary rule. Now, this is the rule that can force a judge to throw out of court on the basis of a small technicality an entire case, no matter how guilty the defendant or how heinous the crime. Our bill would stop this grievous miscarriage of justice by allowing evidence to be introduced where the police officer was acting in good faith. This position has already been taken by some enlightened Federal judges, and I'm asking the Congress to make it the law of the land.
Since the early days of this administration, we've been working to make America a safer place for all our citizens. Last year we launched the Attorney General's task force on crime. Based on their proposals, we worked with the Senate Judiciary Committee to develop an omnibus anticrime package which revises the bail and parole systems and requires tougher Federal penalties for drug trafficking. The measure also requires a judge to take into account the suffering of the victims when it comes time to sentence a criminal.
On other fronts, we've appointed a Task Force on Victims of Crime. And that group will begin hearings this week here in Washington. In the near future, you'll also be hearing more from us about what we can do to stem narcotics crime.
Today, we're sending to the Congress another important installment in our fight against crime. It's a legislative package that I believe offers great hope for improvements in the way that our courts handle criminal cases. These measures will simplify the justice system and make it more likely that those who commit crimes pay a price. The American people want a system of justice they can understand and they can have confidence in. And this is our goal, as well. Working with the Congress, I believe we can deliver a serious blow to the criminal elements in our society.
And ladies and gentlemen of the press, I now turn you over to Ed Meese and these gentlemen from the Justice Department.
Another threat to the family is crime. Many of you have written to me how afraid you are any more to walk the streets at night. Many older citizens are frightened to go out even during the daytime. It's time to get the hardened criminal off the street and "into jail. And right now before the Congress is an omnibus anticrime package. Now in case—maybe some of the younger people here don't know what "omnibus" means. That means it's big. And it means that we're serious about fighting crime. It means we are going to give the victims the break instead of the criminal.
For the criminals who did this deed, no punishment is enough to remove the blot of their crime. But for the rest of us, there are things that we can learn and things that we must do. The people of Lebanon must have learned that the cycle of massacre upon massacre must end. Children are not avenged by the murder of other children. Israel must have learned that there is no way it can impose its own solutions on hatreds as deep and bitter as those that produced this tragedy. If it seeks to do so, it will only sink more deeply into the quagmire that looms before it. Those outsiders who have fed the flames of civil war in Lebanon for so many years need to learn that the fire will consume them, too, if it is not put out. And we must all rededicate ourselves to the cause of peace. I reemphasize my call for early progress to solve the Palestinian issue and repeat the U.S. proposals which are now even more urgent.
The President. My fellow Americans, those of you who tuned in a few weeks ago may remember that the topic of my broadcast was crime. Well, this week I'd like to narrow that subject down to drugs, an especially vicious virus of crime.
Now, regarding the other report I mentioned. In the next few days we'll announce the administration's new strategy for the prevention of drug abuse and drug trafficking. This is a bold, confident plan, and I'm elated. For too long the people in Washington took the attitude that the drug problem was so large nothing could be done about it. Well, we don't accept this sit-on-your-hands kind of thinking. We've decided to do more than pay lip service to the problem, and we started where narcotics crime was the worst: south Florida.
We still have a long way to go. The House leadership left without taking action on tuition tax credits, enterprise zones, or legislation designed to crack down on crime and make our streets safe. The House leadership left to campaign without passing appropriations bills that hold the line on spending. They stonewalled for months and then voted down a constitutional amendment to balance the Federal budget. Those who voted against that balanced budget amendment voted to weaken the financial security of every American family. What people want and certainly deserve is less political delay and demagoguery and more action to reduce the burden of that terrible trillion-dollar debt on their children and grandchildren.
Someone has said that when anyone is denied freedom, then freedom for everyone is threatened. The struggle in the world today for the hearts and minds of mankind is based on one simple question: Is man born to be free, or slave? In country after country, people have long known the answer to that question. We are free by divine right. We are the masters of our fate, and we create governments for our convenience. Those who would have it otherwise commit a crime and a sin against God and man.
The second bill I will sign also deals with compassion—our compassion toward those Americans who are the victims of or witnesses to crime. It is high time the legal system showed the honest citizen as much concern as it does the criminal. Today it is not the wrongdoer who falls through the cracks of our criminal justice system; too often, it is the innocent victim and the dutiful witness.
As the bill states, without the cooperation of victims and witnesses, the criminal justice system would cease to function. Yet, with very few exceptions, these individuals are either ignored or simply used as tools to identify and punish offenders. All too often the victim of a serious crime is forced to suffer physical, psychological, or financial hardship, while the criminal justice system remains unresponsive to the victim's real needs. And while the defendant is provided with counsel who can guide him through the criminal process, the victim or witness is usually not even told when the defendant is released on bail, the case is dismissed, or the court date is changed. Neither is there accurate [adequate] protection from law enforcement agencies when a victim or witness is threatened or intimidated as a result of cooperating with authorities.
The provisions of this act would require that a "victim impact statement" be filed to aid the judge in sentencing the criminal. The act makes it a Federal offense to intimidate or retaliate against victims or witnesses of Federal crime. It requires a Federal judge to order restitution when passing sentence for crimes involving bodily injury or property loss, or else to state for the record his reasons for not doing so.
Mr. Canfield. Yes, Mr. President. This is Roger Canfield, suburban Sacramento. And we're concerned out here with what government can do about crime, considering that's the purpose of government, to protect our life and property. I'm running against a guy out here who's against the death penalty and voted for reduced penalties for rape.
The President. Roger, they're going to think this is a frame-up. I just went over to the Justice Department this morning and made a speech in an auditorium to an assembled audience there—many of them having to do with law enforcement—and announced an eight-point crime program.
Now, I recognize that the Federal Government can only do so much in that because most of our criminal statutes are State statutes and, therefore, it is local law enforcement and local and State government that has to do with that. But our eight-point crime program is aimed at organized crime. We have had a tremendous success with a brand new kind of task force in south Florida, where about 80 percent of the drugs that were coming in from the other countries were coming in through south Florida. And our task force lined up local and State government and our Federal forces, even up to and including military, giving us tracking of boats and planes that were bringing in drugs. And we literally have stopped it cold there.
Now, of course, the drug runners are seeking out other entry points in the country. So, part of our program this morning called for 12 such task forces, nationwide, to go after this, as well as the program against organized crime.
As all of you know, crime today is an American epidemic. It takes the lives of over 20,000 Americans a year, touches nearly a third of America's homes, and results in about $8.8 billion a year in financial losses. I've resisted figuring out and doing what is sometimes typical in remarks of this kind, and that is to tell you how many people are going to be murdered while I'm talking to you.
The perception is growing that the crime problem stems from the emergence of a new privileged class in America, a class of repeat offenders and career criminals who think they have a right to victimize their fellow citizens with virtual impunity. They're openly contemptuous of our way of justice. They don't believe they'll be caught, and if they are caught, they're confident that once their cases enter our legal system, the charges will be dropped, postponed, plea-bargained away, or lost in a maze of legal technicalities that make a mockery of our legitimate and honorable concern with civil liberties.
Once again the research shows that this common perception has a strong basis in fact. Just take one limited part of the crime picture. Transit police in New York estimate that only 500 habitual offenders were responsible for nearly half of the crimes committed in their subways last year. This rise in crime, this growth of a hardened criminal class, has partly been the result of misplaced government priorities and a misguided social philosophy.
At the root of this philosophy lies utopian presumptions about human nature that see man as primarily a creature of his material environment. By changing this environment through expensive social programs, this philosophy holds that government can permanently change man and usher in an era of prosperity and virtue. In much the same way, individual wrongdoing is seen as the result of poor socioeconomic conditions or an underprivileged background. This philosophy suggests in short that there is crime or wrongdoing, and that society, not the individual, is to blame.
But what has also become abundantly clear in the last few years is that a new political consensus among the American people utterly rejects this point of view. The increase in citizen involvement of the crime problem and the tough new State statutes directed at repeat offenders make it clear that the American people are reasserting certain enduring truths—the belief that right and wrong do matter, that individuals are responsible for their actions, that evil is frequently a conscious choice, and that retribution must be swift and sure for those who decide to make a career of preying on the innocent.
This administration, even as we're struggling with our economic and international problems, has also been attempting to deal with the threat of crime and to speak for this new consensus.
When I spoke in New Orleans last year to the International Association of Chiefs of Police, I made the point then, as Bill has told you—and I don't think that I should repeat it now—but we do draw distinctions between violent crime, sophisticated crime, or between crimes like drugpushing and crimes like bribery. The truth is, crime doesn't come in categories. It's part of a pattern. If one sector prospers in the community of crime, so ultimately do all the others.
Today, the power of organized crime reaches into every segment of our society. It is estimated that the syndicate has millions of dollars of assets in legitimate businesses. It controls corrupt union locals. It runs burglary rings. It fences for stolen goods, holds a virtual monopoly on the heroin trade. It thrives on illegal gambling, pornography, gun-running, ear theft, arson, and a host of other illegal activities.
First, in view of the success of the South Florida Task Force, and because of increasing organized crime involvement in drug abuse, we will establish 12 additional task forces in key areas in the United States. These task forces, under the direction of the Attorney General, will work closely with State and local law enforcement officials. Following the south Florida example, they'll utilize the resources of the Federal Government, including the FBI, the DEA, the IRS, the ATF, Immigration and Naturalization Service, United States Marshals Services, the U.S. Customs Service, and the Coast Guard. In addition, in some regions Department of Defense tracking and pursuit capability will be made available.
Second, no weapon against organized crime has proved more effective or more important to law enforcement than the investigations carried on by the Kefauver committee and the McClellan committee in the 1950's or the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, which, as many of you may remember, heard testimony from Federal informant Joseph Vallachi in the 1960's. Although several other commissions on crime have been appointed since then, none has had the time and the resources to fully investigate the syndicate and lay out a national strategy for its elimination. Accordingly, I am announcing the creation of a panel of 15 distinguished Americans from diverse backgrounds and professions with practical experience in criminal justice and combating organized crime.
The purpose of this commission, which will last for 3 years, will be to undertake a region-by-region analysis of organized crime's influence, to analyze and debate the data it gathers, and to hold public hearings on the findings. Not only will the work of this commission lead to important legislative recommendations, it will also heighten public awareness and knowledge about the threat of organized crime and mobilize citizen support for its eradication.
Third, this administration will launch a project similar to the Fifty States Project now underway in the area of women's rights. It will enlist the Nation's Governors in bringing about needed criminal justice reforms. For example, without effective enforcement of local and State statutes against various kinds of racketeering, like illegal gambling, this vital source of revenue for organized crime will never be fully dried up.
Fourth, all the diverse agencies and law enforcement bureaus of the Federal Government will be brought together in a comprehensive attack on drug trafficking and organized crime under a Cabinet-level committee chaired by the Attorney General and a working group chaired by the Associate Attorney General. Their job will be to review interagency and intergovernmental cooperation in the struggle against organized crime and, when necessary, bring problems in these areas to my attention.
And fifth, we're establishing, through Departments of Justice and Treasury, a national center for State and local law enforcement training at the Federal facility in Glynco, Georgia. This center, which will complement the already excellent training programs run by the FBI and DEA, will assist and train local law enforcement agents and officials in combating new kinds of syndicated crime, such as arson, bombing, bribery, computer theft, contract fraud, and bid-rigging, as well as drug smuggling.
Sixth, this administration will open a new legislative offensive that is aimed to win approval of reforms in criminal statutes dealing with bail, sentencing, criminal forfeiture, the exclusionary rule, and labor racketeering, that are essential in the fight against organized crime.
Seventh, I will ask that the Attorney General be required to submit a yearly report to the people, through the President and the Congress, on the status of the fight against organized crime and organized criminal groups dealing in drugs. This requirement, although simple and inexpensive, will establish a formal mechanism through which the Justice Department will take a yearly inventory of its efforts in this area and report to the American people on its progress.
"Justice," James Madison wrote in "The Federalist Papers," "is the end of government. It is the end of civil society. It ever has [been] and ever will be [pursued until it be] 1 obtained, or until liberty be lost in the pursuit." For the sake of our children, for the sake of all the magnificent accomplishments of the American past, today I ask for your support and the support of our people in this effort to fight the drug menace, to eradicate the cancers of organized crime and public corruption, to make our streets and houses safe again, and to return America to the days of respect for the law and the rights of the innocent.
Well, let no one doubt that this is the real story behind the success of the South Florida Task Force. I don't have to tell you how bad conditions were only a year ago. I don't have to remind you of the growth in crime, the increase in violence, and the gang killings. The citizens of Florida, of Dade County, and of Miami took upon themselves the duty of combating crime and the drug menace. They made this fight their fight. They brought it into their homes and schools and churches and community organizations.
We will soon appoint a Presidential commission on organized crime with a 3-year mandate to conduct region-by-region hearings on the influence and impact of organized crime throughout America.
We're establishing a new Cabinet-level committee on organized crime and a subcabinet working group to bring together representatives from many Federal agencies and coordinate their work.
We're also establishing a new Federal program in Glynco, Georgia, for advanced training for local and State law enforcement agents in combating the new and more sophisticated forms of crime.
Well, we're going to have some powerful new weapons now in the battle against organized crime and especially the drug trade.
Now, there are those, of course, who say the program is too ambitious and who point to failed efforts in the past and predict our certain failure in the future. No government can ever fully eliminate crime or the human impulses that lead to it. But your South Florida Task Force proves that we have the will and the resources to break up organized crime—syndicates that, for too long, have been a terrible blot on our nation's history.
We especially need the support of all of you here today for the legislative part of this initiative. During talks with the Justice Department prosecutors in the field, Associate Attorney General Rudy Giuliani reports that doing something about our lax bail and parole system and criminal forfeiture laws is constantly mentioned as effective crime-fighting reforms. I wonder how many of you know that we have already proposed to the Congress reforms in these areas that would make life much tougher for the professional criminal. I wonder how many of you know that parole reform passed the Senate by a vote of 95 to 1, that bail reform passed the Senate by a vote of 95 to 1, and that strengthened criminal forfeiture laws passed the Senate by a vote of 95 to 1. And I wonder how many of you know that in the House of Representatives our crime package has remained bottled up in committee.
The Congress owes it to the American people to act on these proposals and on the rest of our anticrime agenda. Today I ask for your support and the support of the American people in urging the Congress to take immediate action on this program.
You represent the urban heart of our great country, our teeming centers of culture, innovation, and progress. But you and your cities are also saddled with concentrations of our nation's most troubling problems- —high unemployment, decaying neighborhoods, grim crime rates, idle industries, eroding tax bases, and roads and bridges that threaten to crumble beneath us.
q. Mr. President, do you share the view of elected officials in Miami that the rioting there over the holidays was brought on as much by joblessness and economic hardship as by racial tensions? And if you don't share that view, do you see any danger in people with their backs up against the wall in this recession venting their frustration in acts of crime and violence?
The President. I would hate to see that happen. And it certainly would bespeak a difference in the character of our people, because in the Great Depression nothing like that ever took place, when the situation was much worse and there was no unemployment insurance and there was no—for a time—not even any welfare programs of any kind to help out.
I think, though, that when responsible leaders, supposedly, publicly voice their opinion that this is going to happen, they're encouraging it. And I think they ought to think again before they open their mouths.
The time has also come for major reform of our criminal justice statutes and acceleration of the drive against organized crime and drug trafficking. It's high time that we make our cities safe again. This administration hereby declares an all-out war on big-time organized crime and the drug racketeers who are poisoning our young people. We will also implement recommendations of our Task Force on Victims of Crime, which will report to me this week.
Now, these broadcasts are not popular with governments of totalitarian powers. But make no mistake, we have a duty to broadcast. Aleksandr Herzen, the Russian writer, warned, "To shrink from saying a word in defense of the oppressed is as bad as any crime." Well, I pledge to you that America will stand up, speak out, and defend the values we share. To those who would crush religious freedom, our message is plain: You may jail your believers. You may close their churches, confiscate their Bibles, and harass their rabbis and priests, but you will never destroy the love of God and freedom that burns in their hearts. They will triumph over you.
The President. We get back to the old argument again—and I have stated many times—you cannot find in the States, the various States that have gun control laws, that there is any proportionate difference in the crimes committed where there are those very strict laws and where they are far looser in their laws.
The President. Sure would have been more comfortable, except that at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, thereabouts, out there surrounded by many of you, he did what he did in an area that has about the strictest gun control laws that there are in the United States. Now, how effective are gun control laws for someone that wants to commit a crime using a gun when he could choose the place where there's supposed to be least likely to have one?
Now, we conservatives have been warning about the crime problem for many years, about that permissive social philosophy that did so much to foster it, about a legal system that seemed to specialize in letting hardened criminals go free. And now we have the means and the power to do something. Let's get to work.
Now, the exclusionary rule—that isn't a law that was passed by Congress or a State legislature, it's what is called case law, the result of judicial decisions. If a law enforcement officer obtains evidence as the result of a violation of the laws regarding search and seizure, that evidence cannot be introduced in a trial even if it proves the guilt of the accused. Now, this is hardly punishment of the officer for his violation of legal procedures, and it's only effect, in many cases, is to free someone patently guilty of a crime.
Well, this administration has proposed vital reforms of our bail and parole systems and criminal forfeiture and sentencing statutes. These reforms were passed by the Senate 95 to 1 last year. Our anticrime package never got out of committee in the House of Representatives. Do you see a target there? [Laughter] The American people want these reforms, and they want them now. I'm asking tonight that you mobilize all the powerful resources of this political movement to get these measures passed by the Congress.
The President. What role should we play in preventing crime in this country? Well, now, basically, we know that law enforcement is a matter of State and local governments. For example, if someone is tried for murder, they're tried because they have violated the State law in that State against murder. The Federal Government, however, does have a part to play.
One of the great parts that we're playing is—more than half the crime in the United States is drug-related. And we tried an experiment in south Florida. We put, for the first time, we alined all the Federal agencies from drug enforcement to the FBI to the Federal marshals to all of this. And then we went and joined in with all the local and State apparatus down there. We had what we called a task force. And George Bush, the Vice President, was in charge of it.
But we have legislation, a crime package of bills, to try and straighten this out, try and make it more possible to evade these, just, technicalities and really get justice in sentencing criminals.
It was C. S. Lewis who, in his unforgettable "Screwtape Letters," wrote: "The greatest evil is not done now in those sordid 'dens of crime' that Dickens loved to paint. It is not even done in concentration camps and labor camps. In those we see its final result. But it is conceived and ordered (moved, seconded, carried and minuted) in clear, carpeted, warmed, and well-lighted offices, by quiet men with white collars and cut fingernails and smooth-shaven cheeks who do not need to raise their voice."
The Attorney General. Mr. President, last year you appointed a commission on the victims of crime, called the Task Force on the Victims of Crime, to study the problems of victims and to make recommendations to vindicate the rights of victims. That task force completed its work, made 68 recommendations, and those recommendations are now being studied by those of us at the Justice Department and others who are concerned with this problem—victims being the forgotten people in the criminal justice system.
Mr. President, when you established this task force, you led the Nation into a new era in the treatment of victims of crime. Never before has any President recognized the plight of those forgotten by the criminal justice system. It is my privilege to introduce to you five citizens who have given invaluable assistance to your task force. They represent hundreds of others who came forward, some at great personal sacrifice, to inform us all of the depth of this problem.
Mrs. Evelyn Blackwell is a widow from Washington, D.C. She has given us a special sense of the problems crime imposes on senior citizens, and she is a model for how those courageous citizens can fight back.
Since 1975 her home has been broken into five times and her limited income has prevented her from replacing most of those things taken from her. Gradually, she came to fear that no place, including her home, was safe. But because of her spirit and a refusal to give up, Mrs. Blackwell has been working to combat crime in her neighborhood, especially crimes against the elderly. In addition, she and a staff of 40 volunteers accompany elderly victims to court to ease the burden of this process on them.
Mr. Elvus Regalia is a California pharmacist who was driven out of business by crime. Mr. Regalia owned and operated his own pharmacy for some 24 years, during which time he was burglarized six times and robbed on three separate occasions.
Mrs. Geraldine Strong is a victim of crime whose injuries were magnified by the callous way she was treated in the legal system. Mrs. Strong was at work one morning at a Maryland public library when an assailant with a long criminal history kidnaped her at gunpoint, held her captive for 3 hours while he raped, robbed, and repeatedly threatened to kill her if she ever testified against him.
Though Mrs. Strong's attacker was arrested at the scene of the crime, it took the system a year to bring him to trial. Mrs. Strong told your task force that, "my disillusionment with the judicial system is many times more painful than the attacks on me."
But she has not succumbed to her disillusionment. She has volunteered to help train law enforcement professionals to improve their sensitivity and service to victims of crime.
All too often the pain and suffering that victims of crime experience continues long after the passage of the criminal event itself. Last year, three men entered the St. Louis home of Harold and Lily Tuthill and savagely beat them both.
When apprehended, the killers admitted they had picked a house at random to kill everyone in it "for the fun of it." The ringleader of the group was on parole, and he and another killer were also free on bail, awaiting trial for other crimes.
Mrs. Spencer went to work to improve the system of justice in her State. As a result of her efforts and of citizens like her, more than 20 laws have been changed to better protect and assist victims of crime in Indiana. She has been a true champion of the cause of crime victims, and I'm very proud to introduce her to you.
Standing here in the Rose Garden listening to these dreadful stories of senseless brutality seems almost unreal. But for far too many of our citizens, the threat of violent crime is, as we've heard, all too real.
We should be proud that our criminal justice system protects the constitutional rights of the accused. But over the past few years, that system has allowed the safeguards protecting the rights of the innocent to he torn away. This has so complicated the system, clogged our courts, and reduced the chances of conviction—as well as the level of punishment once a criminal is convicted-that the criminal element now calculates that crime really does pay.
The suffering of these victims we've met today and the millions of others, as well, is testimony to the inequity and the inadequacy of today's system. Our Task Force on Victims of Crime called the neglect and mistreatment of crime victims a national disgrace. I heartily agree. What we have to do now is move forward to correct this disgrace and, at the same time, to clear away the roadblocks that prevent the authorities from doing their job. But we need your help. Prompt enactment of our anticrime package, particularly the bail reform and sentencing provisions, is needed to protect victims from criminals. The voice of the people must be heard in the Congress.
It will take time and hard work to undo the distortions of our criminal justice system that brought on this wave of crime. But under Attorney General Smith and his leadership, we're moving on these tough questions.
Ultimately, if we're to succeed, each of us, as citizens, must do his or her part not only through contacting elected officials, though that always helps, but also by watching out for our friends, our families, and our communities. Crime prevention is no longer just a job for the police. Every level of government and Americans everywhere must take an active part. Many neighborhoods have a crime watch program. I would hope that more and more of our citizens take the time and effort to get involved.
My hat is off to New York and its police force for their dedicated and often thankless battle against crime. And I congratulate the New York Daily News for caring enough about its community that it sponsors the New York Crime Fighters Award program. I understand that more than $60,000 in those prize moneys that Mr. Wieghart mentioned have been given out so far, and that's quite an investment in our collective peace of mind.
Or, to take another major social problem, I know all of us were relieved to see recently that crime had actually declined by 4 percent in 1982, the sharpest decline in 5 years. The Director of the FBI, William Webster, has suggested that these new figures may well show that volunteer action through citizen crime prevention groups is having an impact on the problem.
In Philadelphia there are now 581 crime prevention groups. That's up from 167 only a couple of years ago. Here in New York, there are more than 151,000 Volunteers in 13 types of programs. And lest some of you are peering closely and thinking that might be an early campaign button, I just this morning met with one of those crime groups. And they kind of gave me an honorary member[ship] in the Crime Stoppers.
Yes, I think America is a place of many social and economic problems. And, believe me, in my job I hear a lot about them. But I think it's also good for us to remind ourselves and others that our society makes it possible to contend with the recession and crime even while we offer hope to a Linn Yann and to all those living in oppression and tyranny.
The President. Well, I think that he—I may be wrong, but I think that when he made that statement, he was talking with regard to the limited way that we have been trying to perform there. I know that guerrilla wars—time is on the side of the guerrillas and they aren't something that is instantly resolved, just as terrorism isn't something that can be curbed just by normal police actions. These are very difficult things. The hit-and-run tactics of guerrillas are similar to terrorist activities. It's, I suppose, based on an extension of the same principle that you can't ever totally eliminate crime.
Well, I know that the residents here are very grateful that you are out there on the streets keeping the crime rate low. And I've just had a demonstration from the sheriff on that also and some figures that show that probably this is the lowest crime rate spot in the United States. I think that the people are grateful that you've made Sun City a safer and more reassuring place to live. And, of course, all this is a volunteer effort, which makes it even more admirable.
We all know how frightening crime is to the old and the young. Yet older Americans also require protection from other aspects of modern life. Remember the terrifying bully called inflation, that ate away at pensions and savings—and that was a form of robbery also. Inflation was running in double digits in 1980. And right now it's running at—just about for the last 6 months less than one-half of 1 percent. And it showed its first actual decline, below zero level—quarter decline, just recently, in nearly 25 years.
No group does more to promote gun safety and respect for the laws of this land than the NRA, and I thank you. Still, we've both heard the charge that supporting gunowners rights encourages a violent, shoot-em-up society. But just a minute. Don't they understand that most violent crimes are not committed by decent, law-abiding citizens? They're committed by career criminals. Guns don't make criminals. Hard-core criminals use guns. And locking them up, the hard-core criminals up, and throwing away the key is the best gun-control law we could ever have.
When I was Governor of California, we dealt with gun control—we added 5 to 15 years to the sentence of any criminal who, while committing a crime, had a gun in his possession, whether he used that gun or not. Now, I'm even more convinced than ever that this is the right approach if they're going to talk about something to do with guns and crime.
So, we have declared war on organized crime and the career criminal element in America. More than a hundred prosecutors' offices are working with special teams around the country to throw the book at career criminals in court. And we're determined to cripple the drug-pushers who are poisoning the minds and bodies of our children. We want mandatory sentences. We want firm and speedy application of penalties. And we want to abolish parole for Federal offenses. But there's one thing we do not want: We will never disarm any American who seeks to protect his or her family from fear and harm.
We are making headway in our crackdown on crime. A recent U.S. News and World Report story said that "It may be no accident that the first dip in U.S. crime totals in 5 years coincides with a nationwide crackdown on career criminals." Well, serious reported crime dropped by 4 percent in 1982, after rising more than 21 percent since 1977 and 254 percent since 1962.
Longer prison sentences and tougher treatment are beginning to pay dividends. And make no mistake: This is happening because you, the people, are fed up with crime. You're the ones who are organizing neighborhood patrols, supporting your local police, insisting that justice be carried out-and every time you do that, you keep the spirit of democracy strong in America.
May 15th marks the beginning of National Police Week. I urge you and every citizen to let our men and women in blue across America know we stand with them this week and every week of the year. Another way NRA can help police is to support our efforts for a minimum mandatory term of 5 years imprisonment—and perhaps there'll be some disagreement in this, but I have to say it: for the use of armor-piercing bullets during a Federal crime of violence. These are designed to truly be a threat to law enforcement officers who, so many times, have to depend on bulletproof vests.
Of course, many millions of American mothers are quiet, everyday heroes struggling to stretch budgets and too often maintaining their families alone. Many also contribute to society through full-time careers, and others are forced to work just to make ends meet. They're raising children in a fast-paced world where basic values are constantly questioned. Their monumental challenge is to bring their children into adulthood, healthy and whole, nurturing their physical and emotional growth while avoiding the pitfalls of drug abuse and crime.
In the area of public order and law enforcement, for example, we're reversing a dangerous trend of the last decade. While crime was steadily increasing, the Federal commitment in terms of personnel was steadily shrinking. This administration has reversed this trend by adding more than 1,000 new investigators and prosecutors to law enforcement rolls, and we have redirected our resources for a frontal assault on drugs and organized crime. Or take our federalism proposals: We want to cut back on Federal intrusions to local and State governments, and so those local and State governments can be more responsive to the people.
The President. Well, I didn't turn anyone down. I have received no recommendation from the Justice Department for other pardons. I did receive the recommendation for the one gentleman. He had never committed a crime of any kind before. He was not, in any way, a ringleader or a great activist in the deed performed. He served his sentence and since then has lived up to the letter of the law and been a very fine, productive citizen. And those are the terms for pardoning someone, so we pardoned him.
Bill [Bill Plante, CBS News]?
Mr. President, it is my sense that the people of EPA who have stayed with it from the beginning are there because of their belief in the fundamental importance of their mission. EPA was not created to deal with the usual mix of social problems, whether they be poverty, jobs, housing, education, crime. In a real sense, EPA's mission transcends all of these. That mission is the preservation of life itself. The career people of EPA recognize better than the rest of us the necessity of harmonizing their mission with the essentials of the life they're trying to preserve. They know the single-minded pursuit of any social goal to the exclusion of all others can cause severe societal distortions. They are willing and uniquely able to help our country avoid those distortions if so charged.
Respect for human life and the physical integrity, along with the dignity of all Salvadorans is the responsibility of the Commission on Human Rights and the constant concern of my Government. I am pleased to say that in order to safeguard those human rights, we have adopted concrete and pragmatic measures, such as the granting of amnesty, accelerated consideration of cases involving political crimes, plans to reform legal procedures applicable to such crimes, cooperation with the International Red Cross, ministerial directives to the security forces to insure strict compliance to legal procedures, and other similar measures. One important step toward guaranteeing respect for human rights will be the judicial reform which is envisioned in the new constitution: independent judicial authority and an independent Attorney General, with sufficient authority and sufficient means to improve the administration of justice. Furthermore, the Attorney General will have the technical capability for the scientific investigation of crime.
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
What kind of freedom have the Sandinistas established? Just ask the 1,300 stevedores at the Nicaraguan port of Corinto. Last month, their union assembly was packed with Sandinistas, and six union leaders were arrested. Their presumed crime was trying to develop ties with independent trade unions, including some here affiliated with the AFL-CIO. I can tell you one thing, if all the longshoremen in Corinto are like Teddy Gleason, the Sandinistas have got a real fight on their hands.
And today we come to show solidarity with our brothers and sisters who are captives, not because of crimes that they have committed but because of crimes committed against them by dictators and tyrants.
Ask yourselves: Was it our words that destroyed peace in Afghanistan, or was it Soviet aggression? Is peace served by sealing our lips while millions are tortured or killed in Vietnam and Cambodia? Or should we not speak out to demand those crimes be stopped? It's not provocative to warn that once a Communist revolution occurs, citizens are not permitted free elections, a free press, free trade, free unions, free speech, freedom to worship, or property, or freedom to travel as we please. Many military regimes have evolved into democracies. But no Communist regime has ever become a democracy, provided freedom or given its people economic prosperity.
We will speak the truth. Aleksandr Herzen, the Russian writer, warned: "To shrink from saying a word in defense of the oppressed is as bad as any crime." That's why we want improved and expanded broadcasts over the Voice of America, Radio Free Europe, and Radio Liberty. And that's why we want, and the Cuban people need, Radio Marti.
Recently, we've passed through a painful era in American history when it seemed that many of our proudest values and most important institutions were called into question. It's my personal belief that as mindless and destructive as some of the criticism was, its final result has been not only a reaffirmation of those institutions and those values but a new and greater understanding and appreciation for their usefulness and their meaning. The FBI will continue to look to the future, to use the latest and most sophisticated techniques to fight organized crime, white-collar crime, terrorism-in short, to do what needs to be done to protect the law-abiding people of the United States.
The challenge of crime today in America is a grave one. As you know, upon entering office this administration addressed itself immediately to the economic crisis that we were facing at that time as well as to the dangerous decline that had taken place in our Nation's national security and military strength. Yet even while we worked on these difficult problems we still kept work on the Nation's crime problem foremost in our minds.
Last year, when I announced at the Justice Department our eight-point program for attacking this problem, I was pleased to be able to announce a very sizable expansion of Justice Department personnel, including for the first time in many years additional agents for the FBI. We're now moving forward with other elements of the crime program, and we're doing so methodically and carefully but with one goal in mind. The recent increase in the drug trade, which has led to your new role in this battle, is really a reflection of an even deeper problem: the criminal networks and syndicates that have been tolerated in America for too long. I can only repeat to you that we're going after organized crime, root and branch. Our goal is to break the power of the mob in America and nothing short of it. We mean to end their profits, imprison their members, and cripple their organization.
It's often been said that no government can eliminate or end the illegal activities that provide much of the revenue and support for organized crime. Well, that is only true as far as it goes. I agree that government cannot stop or abolish the human impulses that make racketeering profitable. But I also believe we'd have the capacity to break apart and ultimately destroy the tightly knit regional and national networks of career criminals who live off these activities.
Late last year, I announced a national strategy to expose, prosecute, and ultimately cripple organized crime in America. We're proceeding carefully with the elements of that strategy. Its final goal is the removal of a blot on American history that has lasted nearly a hundred years.
As I've said before, few weapons against organized crime have proven more effective or more important to law enforcement than the investigations of the Kefauver committee in the early fifties, the labor racketeering hearings of the McClellan committee in the mid-fifties, and the testimony of Federal informant Joseph Valachi before a Senate committee in the 1960's. While some other commissions on crime have been appointed since then, each has been of short duration and had neither the time nor the resources to fully investigate the syndicate and lay out a national program for its elimination.
The purpose of this Commission, which will last for nearly 3 years, will be to undertake through public hearings a region-by-region exposure and analysis of organized crime, to measure its influence and impact on American society, and make judicial and legislative recommendations.
The membership of this Commission shows strong geographical balance, and it includes representatives of the judiciary, the Congress, the academic community, the private sector, and most important, law enforcement at all levels. We've been especially careful to include—and I believe this will be one of the Commission's greatest strengths—a number of individuals who, though not widely known, have had extensive, frontline experience with organized crime and are among the acknowledged experts in this field.
But prosecutions by themselves can never dig out the roots of a problem that reaches so deeply into our society. Nor is the Congress, which has many other matters on its agenda, in a position to take responsibility for the business of exposing organized crime, its latest techniques and inroads. That's why this Commission is so vitally important, one of the centerpieces in our strategy for a frontal assault on the mob in America.
One reason we sought to include a broad cross section of America in the membership of this Commission stems from our firm belief that this battle can never be fully won at the Federal level. Only when we work in our States and communities to put out of business the racketeering that fills the coffers of organized crime, only when we fully expose and isolate those groups or individuals who work or do business with organized crime can we expect a final victory.
And now, I didn't remember enough whether the figures are going to be correct that I'm giving, but I understand that you have some 30,000 lawyers and 300 law firms contributing toward the $10 1/2 million raised for your Second Century Fund. These contributions are the centerpiece of the ABA's public service work for America: hundreds of programs addressing public concerns ranging from child abuse to the problems of the elderly, from government waste to the high cost of justice, from juvenile crime to the energy challenge. We need your idealism and compassion' in our families, neighborhoods, businesses, and government. We need you to carry on this fine tradition of public service.
Crime is an issue of social justice. Its elimination is essential to full freedom and opportunity for all Americans. To cite just one example, in 1980, blacks were victimized by crimes against persons at a 25-percent higher rate than whites. So, we've introduced the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1983—to deny bail to a defendant posing a threat to the community; to make prison sentencing more certain; to end abuses of parole; and to modify the exclusionary rule, so that evidence obtained in good faith can be used in a criminal trial.
Over 50 percent of violent crime goes unreported. I have appointed a Presidential Task Force on Victims of Crime, and it has made 68 recommendations. Many of them are being acted upon. We're also carrying out many enforcement initiatives. We now have law enforcement coordinating committees in over 90 judicial districts. Last Thursday, I had the honor of appointing a commission to conduct a region-by-region analysis of organized crime infiltration—a commission headed by one of the most distinguished members of your profession, Judge Irving R. Kaufman. And we've set up 12 regional drug enforcement task forces. They're modeled on the successful South Florida Task Force, which stemmed the heavy flow of drugs into Florida. They're working on 260 cases. We think it's time, also, to crack down on the peddlers of filth and smut. The Justice Department has a program to do this, and we've notified U.S. attorneys that enforcement of pornography laws is a prime concern.
There isn't time to outline all that we're trying to do to give back to you, the American people, control over your own lives and destinies. Even as we fight to restore prosperity at home and our prestige abroad, we're dealing firmly and imaginatively with the menace of crime and drugs that has cost us so dearly, especially here in Texas. We've expanded the success of the South Florida Task Force by establishing 12 similar task forces throughout the Nation, including one in Houston. That means more than 1,200 new investigators and prosecutors will be cracking down on the drug racketeers.
We're launching a frontal assault on organized crime with the recent appointment of a Kefauver-style commission, headed by a distinguished jurist, that will hold regional hearings throughout the country.
But despite the savagery of their crime, the universal reaction against it, and the evidence of their complicity, the Soviets still refuse to tell the truth. They have persistently refused to admit that their pilot fired on the Korean aircraft. Indeed, they've not even told their own people that a plane was shot down.
We have joined with other countries to press the International Civil Aviation Organization to investigate this crime at an urgent special session of the Council. At the same time, we're listening most carefully to private groups, both American and international, airline pilots, passenger associations, and others, who have a special interest in civil air safety.
During my first press conference 9 days after being sworn in as your President, I was asked a question having to do with Soviet intentions. In my answer I cited their own words—that they have openly and publicly declared the only morality they recognize is what will further world communism; that they reserve unto themselves the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, in order to attain that. And I pointed out that we should keep this in mind when we deal with them.
Rather than tell the truth about the Korean Air Lines massacre, rather than immediately and publicly investigate the crash, explain to the world how it happened, punish those guilty of the crime, cooperate in efforts to find the wreckage, recover the bodies, apologize and offer compensation to the families, and work to prevent a repetition, they have done the opposite. They've stonewalled the world, mobilizing their entire government behind a massive coverup, then brazenly threatening to kill more men, women, and children should another civilian airliner make the same mistake as KAL 007.
Finally, let us come together as a nation tomorrow in a National Day of Mourning to share the sorrow of the families and let us resolve that this crime against humanity will never be forgotten anywhere in the world.
The Soviets have not budged. Apparently, their contempt for the truth and for the opinion of the civilized world is equaled only by their disdain for helpless people like the passengers aboard KAL Flight 007. They reserve for themselves the right to live by one set of rules, insisting everyone else live by another. They're supremely confident their crime and coverup will soon be forgotten, and we'll all be back to business as usual. Well, I believe they're badly mistaken. This case is far from closed. The Soviets aggression has provoked a fundamental and long overdue reappraisal in countries all over the globe. The Soviet Union stands virtually alone against the world.
Ultimately, the answer to many of these problems will be found in better relations between the Soviet Union and the rest of the world. The massacre of 269 airline passengers has brought home to many just how difficult this will be. At an absolute minimum, the Soviets should give the world an apology, an admission of responsibility, pay reparations to the victims' families, and provide assurances that such a crime will never be repeated. For our part, we stand ready to work with the Soviet Government to see that this kind of tragedy never happens again and to deal on other vital issues such as arms reduction.
Recently, the Soviet massacre of 269 airline passengers shocked the civilized world. But Polish Americans know all about the brutal nature of the regime that has controlled the Soviet Union since 1917. You know that downing a passenger airliner is totally consistent with a government that murdered 15,000 Polish officers in the Katyn forest. We cannot let the world forget that crime, and we will not.
Looking beyond the economy, we see more evidence that the quality of life is improving. Life expectancy reached a record high last year, climbing to 74.5 years. Infant mortality declined to an all-time low with only 11.2 deaths per 1,000 live births. And the number of divorces dropped for the first time since 1962. Serious crime dropped 3 percent, the first measurable decline since 1977. Quality education, an American tradition—but one neglected for years—will be restored, thanks to leadership in Washington and vigorous action by your families at the grassroots.
During our talks, which have been friendly and open and, I believe, reciprocally very useful, we have carefully examined—with mutual constructive hopes—several matters. These matters are essential to attain peace both in Europe and in the world: problems and prospects of international economy, the development of Italian-American relations, issues of common interest for industrial cooperation and for an in-depth struggle against crime and the international drug traffic connected to it.
Also, in view of an ever-effective fight against organized crime which is involved in international drug traffic and which is challenging and threatening our societies, a special joint commission will be set up and the necessary steps will be taken so that it may operate in the most effective way.
Governor Atiyeh. You're welcome. We thought it was kind of nice ourselves as Governors. Picking up on the theme of your interest in education, here again we recognize, as Governors, how important that is within our own States as well as nationally, and some sense the frustration that Congress hasn't acted on your crime control package, and we urge them to move forward on that issue.
What a relief to be able to say, thanks to our law enforcement community at the Federal, State, and local levels, crime statistics in America are finally coming down, and they'll stay down. But I know that a few people, who note that we have less people in the crime-prone age, now want to attribute the encouraging downward trend in crime to this statistical correlation. Well, a coincidence isn't a correlation. The truth is that crime has sometimes risen with population growth and sometimes not. There's nothing historically inevitable about it. The really key factor has always been the will of a society to punish those who prey on the innocent and the willingness of the leaders of that society, especially those in the judiciary and the law enforcement system, to enforce that will.
Whether it's this administration's crackdown on drug traffickers and organized crime or the tougher sentencing laws being passed in so many States, the evidence abounds that Americans want to reassert basic values—values that say right and wrong do matter, that the individual is responsible for his actions, and that society must protect itself from career criminals who prey on the innocent and undermine the respect for law vital to freedom and prosperity.
And the numbers of arrests and indictments are dramatically up. Organized crime convictions are up from 515 in fiscal 1981 to 1,331 in 1983. And I know that you've been especially active in pressing for collection of civil and criminal fines in government debt and fraud eases. In fact, the amount collected by the Justice Department this year is double what it was last year. So, all of you've played a major role in bringing about enormous changes in a very short period of time.
And yet, I feel the full weight of your contribution is still to be felt. As you know, we've had to spend much of our time in setting the stage for change. We had to get you the tools that you need to do your job. And we're getting results. After years of decline in our investigative forces, more than a thousand new investigators and 200 new prosecutors are joining the fight against crime this year.
And, as I'm sure many of you know, our organized crime commission held some widely publicized hearings last week here in Washington. The commission will be the first indepth look at this problem since the Kefauver hearings. It will put the menace of organized crime front and center on the American agenda, and I'm certain that its work will make your job easier.
When I announced a year ago many of these steps, including the drug task forces and organized crime commission, I said that our goal was a frontal assault on criminal syndicates in America, and I stand by those words today. I know some people like to say that we shouldn't aim too high in our goals against the syndicates. They say the mob has been around for a long time and government will never eliminate the human impulses that lead to this kind of criminal activity. Well, I've always believed that government can break up the networks, the tightly organized regional and national syndicates that make up organized crime.
But while drug trafficking and, certainly, organized crime remain our major concerns, I did want to say a few words about the importance of your work in the area of fraud against the government. I've referred to this before as an unrelenting national scandal. I want to urge you today to redouble your efforts to end this scandal. I hope that when these eases come to your attention, you'll remember that those who defraud the government are not just stealing from an institution; they're stealing from the Brooklyn cab driver, the Detroit autoworker, the Texas dirt farmer, and all the millions of honest working people in this county who pay their taxes and abide by the law.
Your most important contribution has been a change in public attitude. Today, drunk driving isn't a bad habit to be excused; it's a crime to be stopped.
Let us remember the families who maintain a watch for their missing in action. And, yes, let us remember all those who are persecuted inside the Soviet bloc—not because they commit a crime, but because they love God in their hearts and want the freedom to celebrate Hanukkah or worship the Christ Child.
According to a 1978 report by the National Institute of Education, each month 3 million secondary school children were victims of in-school crime. I don't mean ordinary high jinks; I mean crime. Each month some 2.5 million students were the victims of robberies and thefts, and more than 250,000 students suffered physical attacks. In large cities, the problem was so bad that almost 8 percent of urban junior and senior high school students missed at least 1 day in the classroom per month because they were afraid to go to school.
Today American children need good education more than ever. But we can't get learning back into our schools until we get the crime and violence out. It's not a question of anyone asking for a police state. It's just that, as Albert Shanker of the American Federation of Teachers put it, "We're not going to get people interested in English or mathematics or social studies and languages, unless we solve discipline problems and take out of our schools those students who prevent teachers from teaching."
The Department of Education will study ways to prevent school violence, publicize examples of effective school discipline, continue its joint project with the National Institute of Justice to find better ways for localities to use their resources to prevent school crime.
And at the same time that we've moved ahead on the economy, we've moved against waste and fraud in the Federal Government, saving billions of dollars. We've taken aim at crime, increasing drug-related arrests, more than doubling organized crime convictions, and setting up drug task forces across the country. And we've moved education to the very top of the national agenda. When we took office, only a handful of States had task forces on education. Today that number is 50.
Economic recovery, better education, rededication to values, all show the spirit of renewal gaining the upper hand. And all will improve family life in the eighties. But families need more. They need assurance that they and their loved ones can walk the streets of America without being afraid. Parents need to know their children will not be victims of child pornography and abduction. This year we will intensify our drive against these and other horrible crimes like sexual abuse and family violence.
Already our efforts to crack down on career criminals, organized crime, drugpushers, and to enforce tougher sentences and paroles are having effect. In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, the biggest decline since 1972. Protecting victims is just as important as safeguarding the rights of defendants.
Americans yearn to explore life's deepest truths. And to say their entertainment-their idea of entertainment is sex and violence and crime is an insult to their goodness and intelligence. We are people who believe love can triumph over hate, creativity over destruction, and hope over despair. And that's why so many millions hunger for your product—God's good news.
Over the past year, the United States Customs Service has increased by 200 percent its confiscation of obscene materials coming in across our borders. We're also intensifying our drive against crimes of family violence and sexual abuse. I happen to believe that protecting victims is just as important as safeguarding the rights of defendants.
Our mission stretches far beyond our borders; God's family knows no borders. In your life you face daily trials, but millions of believers in other lands face far worse. They are mocked and persecuted for the crime of loving God. To every religious dissident trapped in that cold, cruel existence, we send our love and support. Our message? You are not alone; you are not forgotten; do not lose your faith and hope because someday you, too, will be free.
According to a 1978 report by the National Institute of Education, each month over 2 million secondary schoolchildren were victims of in-school crime. Not ordinary high jinks—crime. In 1981, during a 5-month period in California, there were at least 100,000 incidents of violence. A study of Boston high schools showed that during 1982 more than one-sixth of female students and more than one-third of male students carried weapons to school. And a 1983 survey of Michigan schools shows that one in five Michigan teachers has been struck by a student.
To promote good order in our schools, the Department of Education is studying ways to combat school violence, and the Department is continuing its joint project with the National Institute of Justice to find better ways for localities to use their resources to prevent school crime.
For too many years, crime and the fear of crime robbed the—or eroded the strength and vitality of our neighborhoods. We're finally making some headway. In 1982—or maybe you've already been told and know that the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, and that's the biggest drop since 1972.
And just last week the Senate under the able leadership of our Judiciary Committee chairman, Strom Thurmond, overwhelmingly passed our comprehensive crime control initiatives. Now, if the House would act-and for the life of me I don't know what they're waiting for—we could finally put a comprehensive and long-overdue anticrime package on the books. Clay,1 we'll be working with you to try to get them moving on this.
We know that formidable challenges remain, and meeting them is what Crime Prevention Week is all about. This year the spotlight is on the Neighborhood Watch.
But crime prevention is much more than that, and it's a nationwide movement. All across the country people are working together with law enforcement agencies to protect themselves, their loved ones, and their neighborhoods.
The National Exchange Club started the movement 37 years ago. And today its nearly 1,300 service clubs nationwide are working hard to promote crime preventive activities. The American Association of Retired Persons is helping the elderly. The
National Crime Prevention Council and its spokesdog, McGruff, are leading a nationwide anticrime education program. The National Sheriffs Association has a key role in the Neighborhood Watch program.
Even sports teams are getting into the act. The Kansas City Chiefs, supported by local business, distribute football cards to local police departments, which in turn give them away to neighborhood children. The cards have a color, action picture of a player on one side and a crime prevention tip on the other• The only way to get a card is to ask a policeman, which reinforces positive communications between the cop on the beat and the neighborhood children.
They're expected to be administrators, social workers, public relations experts, at times, philosophers and politicians and still somehow always be an officer of the law. And I thought my job was tough. [Laughter] Well, let me assure police officers everywhere of our firm support and unfailing gratitude. If we can get our comprehensive crime control act through the House, I think your job will become a little bit easier.
And now, let me commend the Neighborhood Watch Program. It's a program that I really like. In preparing for this ceremony, we did a little research and discovered that, using conservative estimates, of course—no other kind— [laughter] —that one in six live in a community with a citizen anticrime program. Watch programs in nearly 30,000 communities involve about 10 million volunteers. The best news is that they're doing a great job. Fairfax County, Virginia, reported a 44-percent drop in burglary over the last 3 years. Each day and night a thousand citizens watch out for their neighbors. Chief Buracker estimates that it would cost the taxpayer $30 million a year to replace this volunteer effort.
In Florida's Dade County, a youth crime watch program is credited for much of the 25-percent decline in school crime and 20-percent drop in narcotics use since 1983—pardon
me, 1981. That would have been a sudden drop. We're seeing the same positive results with watch programs all over the country, from Seattle to Las Vegas to Jackson, Mississippi. And what we're really witnessing is a reaffirmation of American values: a sense of community and fellowship, individual responsibility, caring for family and friends, and a respect for the law.
Attorney General Smith. Mr. President, I would like at this time, if I can find him, to present to you, McGruff, our national crime dog.
Shouldn't we have the right as citizens of this great country to walk our streets without being afraid and to go to bed without worrying the next sound might be a burglar or a rapist? Of course we should. But in reality we don't. The sad fact is too many of our friends and loved ones live in fear of crime. And there's no mystery as to why. For too many years, the scales of criminal justice were tilted toward protecting rights of criminals. Those in charge forgot or just plain didn't care about protecting your rights—the rights of law-abiding citizens.
Common sense is beginning to pay off. In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent—the biggest decline since 1972. But we still face a tremendous challenge, and meeting that challenge is what I want to talk to you about today.
Since drugs are related to an enormous amount of violent crime, drug trafficking and organized crime are among our major targets. For the first time in this nation's history, we've thrown the resources of the FBI into drug enforcement. A new border interdiction program is underway. Task forces aimed at drug gangs cover the Nation, and they've indicted more than 1,300 persons in the last year.
In fact, since our administration came into office, the number of drug-related convictions has increased 33 percent. Since 1981 the number of enforcement agents, prosecutors, and the amount of funding and Federal cooperation with State and local agencies have all greatly increased. Even the military is providing assistance in the fight against drug traffickers. But we still need to do more. We need new laws to stop drug traffickers from harming our people, especially our young people. And we need tougher laws to fight other forms of crime so we can make the lives of all Americans more secure.
Let me give you some examples of what's at stake here. One of our bill's reforms would create tougher laws permitting Federal prosecutors to seize the profits and assets of organized crime and drug traffickers. This would be a severe blow to the crime czars. Why should any right-minded person oppose it?
Our bill would also cut back on the misuse of insanity as a defense, strengthen child pornography laws, and provide greater financial assistance to State and local law enforcement programs. Independently of our crime package, we're mounting a major effort to combat crimes such as sexual assault and family violence. We're also working hard to improve the justice system treatment of our fellow citizens who were the innocent victims of crime.
These reforms make good sense, and there's no excuse for not passing them. The liberal approach of coddling criminals didn't work and never will. Nothing in our Constitution gives dangerous criminals a right to prey on innocent, law-abiding people. I would hope the Members of the House could remember this and bring up our bill for consideration without further delay. This is the most comprehensive anticrime legislation in more than a decade. In the interest of true justice and in recognition of this past week, National Crime Prevention Week, it deserves full debate and a vote. Perhaps you might inquire from your Representative if he or she is ready to act, and if not, why not.
But America can only move forward if the foundation of our society and freedom is secure. Our families and communities must be able to live and work without fear of being mugged, robbed, and raped. We have a comprehensive crime bill that would provide long-overdue protection to law-abiding citizens. It would put an end to the liberal era of coddling criminals. The Senate with its Republican majority has passed that bill, but the House with its Democratic majority is sitting on it. Maybe it's time they felt some pressure from the grassroots. You know, you don't have to make them see the light; just make them feel the heat. [Laughter]
First is crime. The Senate is completing its work on the most sweeping anticrime bill in more than a decade. Our legislation provides a long overdue protection to law-abiding Americans, and it would help put an end to the era of coddling criminals. The security of our people should take precedence over partisan politics, so I ask the House to stop dragging its feet and to act promptly.
Permit me to close by mentioning two vital matters that are now before the Congress. The first is a subject of special concern to senior citizens—crime.
The reason crime is so bad is no mystery. For too many years the scales of criminal justice were tilted in favor of the criminals themselves. Those in charge forgot, or just plain didn't care, about protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens. We came to Washington determined to restore the proper balance to our criminal justice system. And we've begun to get results.
In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, and that was the biggest decline in a decade. But we still face a tremendous challenge. One of the most important steps we've proposed is the comprehensive control act and the most sweeping anticrime bill in more than 10 years. Recently, the Senate passed the crime control act and several important related crime bills. But in the House, instead of giving those bills the priority they deserve, the leadership has bottled them up in committee.
Well, these crime bills that we're talking about should be above partisan politics. And I urge you to help me tell the American people what the House leadership is doing. If we hold a few feet to the fire, certain Members of the Congress might finally realize that the American people want action. I've said repeatedly, you don't have to make them see the light; just make them feel the heat. [Laughter]
Strength in the economy, a firm sense of purpose in foreign affairs, the will to combat crime and seek God's help—it all adds up to a great national renewal, a reaffirmation of the fundamental American values of hard work, family, freedom, and faith.
Three years then—the direction of our domestic and foreign policies has been fundamentally changed. At the same time we were dealing with the pressing problems of our economy and national security, the problem of crime and the career criminal has remained among our top priorities. The 8-point program that I announced over a year ago is beginning to show some gratifying results.
Drug-related arrests are averaging a thousand a month and convictions 800 a month, and Federal law enforcement has taken out of circulation 2 1/3 million pounds of illicit drugs and 20 million doses of prescription drugs. FBI organized crime convictions are up from 515 in fiscal '81 to 1,331 in 1983. After years of decline in our investigative forces, more than a thousand new investigators and 200 new prosecutors joined the fight last year against crime.
Our organized crime commission, headed by Judge Irving Kaufman, will put the menace of organized crime, well, where it belongs: front and center on the American agenda. Our goal is a frontal assault on criminal syndicates in America. We mean to cripple the mobsters' organization, dry up their profits, and put their members behind bars where they belong.
Through our victims of crime task force and the family violence task force, we have launched major initiatives to improve the treatment of innocent victims of crime and solve the problem of violence in American households.
And why these fairness experts and compassion crusaders have bottled up effective anticrime legislation on Capitol Hill for 2 years in a row? Where's the compassion in forgetting the victims of crime? What is fair about holding up urgently needed reform of our bail and parole systems, about refusing to revise the exclusionary rule or reinstitute the death penalty? The Senate has adopted a significant package of these very anticrime measures. Now it's time for the House to act.
Well, I believe those who are so quick to find fault with what we and the American people have achieved during the past 3 years owe an accounting to the American people. Perhaps they can explain how under the guise of compassion and fairness those who once stood for the working people have now divorced themselves from the concerns of everyday Americans and turned themselves over to the trendy politics of the special interest groups. Maybe they could explain why they're opposed to tax cuts, to the balanced budget amendment, to the prayer amendment, to tuition tax credits, to anticrime legislation, to adequate defense spending.
Let me take just a moment to mention two vital matters now that are before the Congress, and the first is crime. For too many years the scales of justice have been tilted in favor of the criminals, with devastating results. Rising crime rates, a flood of illegal drugs, billions of dollars worth of property stolen or destroyed each year, and, worst of all, millions of Americans living their daily lives in fear. We were determined to restore balance to our criminal justice system, and I think we've made genuine progress.
In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, and that was the sharpest decline in 10 years. But we still have much to do. Recently the Senate passed our comprehensive crime control act and several other related crime bills. But in the House, the Democrats have stalled these vital bills by bottling them up in committee.
We have a comprehensive crime bill to correct this. It would put an end to the era of coddling criminals, and it's been passed by the Senate. But the legislation is bottled up in the House. Now, maybe it's time they heard from a few of you—a few million of you. You know, you don't have to make them see the light; just make them feel the heat. [Laughter] I hope you realize that in my comments about some of the shortcomings of the Congress, believe me, tonight, present company is excepted.
Now, as long as they do that and as long as they, at the same time, have openly and publicly declared that the only morality they recognize is what will further their cause, meaning they reserve unto themselves the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, in order to attain that, and that is moral, not immoral, and we operate on a different set of standards, I think when you do business with them, even at a detente, you keep that in mind.
Samuel Gompers, who founded the American Federation of Labor and who literally gave his life to that cause, said, "Doing for people what they can and ought to do for themselves is a dangerous experiment. In the last analysis the welfare of the workers depends upon their own initiative. Whatever is done under the guise of philanthropy or social morality which in any way lessens initiative is the greatest crime that can be committed against the toilers. Let social busybodies and professional public morals experts in their fads reflect upon the perils they rashly invite under the pretense of social welfare."
We've gone astray from first principles. We've lost sight of the rule that individual freedom and ingenuity are at the very core of everything that we've accomplished. Government's first duty is to protect the people, not run their lives. What have been some of the results of this straying from basic principles? Well, for one, violent crime has surged 10 percent, making neighborhood streets unsafe and families fearful in their homes. We've been left with a legacy of almost 8 million people out of work—666,000 of them construction workers. All of these people have been robbed of a basic human dignity and forced into the humiliation of unemployment. The annual inflation rate has soared to nearly 12 percent, making a mockery of hard work and savings. And our national debt has grown to more than $950 billion despite taxes that eat up an ever-increasing share of the family dollar.
The President. Well, we had a very nice talk. And I told him that I believe that some of the things that we had tried in California served better, and that is to make the penalties for the carrying of a weapon, particularly in the commission of a crime, much stiffer than they are. California—we added 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence for anyone carrying a gun in the commission of a crime—convicted of that crime, whether they used the gun or not. And since, that's been augmented to include no probation—mandatory prison sentence.
So, I would like to see us directing our attention to what has caused us to have the crime that continues to increase as it has and is one of our major problems in the country today.
In the last month, there was a radio address to the Nation on Labor Day, a TV address on the economy, a news conference that covered the waterfront of issues. I've had an opportunity to do some traveling, to talk to union members in Chicago about the housing industry, to help get Westway started in New York City, assist at the dedication of President Ford's museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and to talk to the Republican women leaders in Denver about Wall Street and Main Street. Last week in New Orleans, I announced some major initiatives on crime and also spoke to the World Bank conference about our new development policy. And when I leave you—and I regret that I have to be here so briefly—I'm going to be speaking to the National Alliance of Business about mobilizing the private sector to assist the underprivileged.
Take the preventive detention, which is a name put upon a bail provision. The Constitution provides that bail shall be reasonable. What we're suggesting, what the Attorney General's task force has brought up, is that there would be a reasonable standard of bail. And we think that to take a person who has proved, by committing another crime while out on bail for a first crime, that they should be let out on bail again and again, we don't think that's reasonable. So, we're looking for some modifications of bail, to look at the protection of society, along with the ability of people to get out prior to their trial.
So, too, the problem of crime—one as real and deadly serious as any in America today. It demands that we seek transformation of our legal system, which overly protects the rights of criminals while it leaves society and the innocent victims of crime without justice.
And, finally, there's the problem of crime, a problem whose gravity cannot be underestimated. This administration has moved in its appointments to the Federal bench and in its legislative proposals for bail and parole reform to assist in the battle against the lawless. But we must always remember that our legal system does not need reform so much as it needs transformation. And this cannot occur at just the Federal level. It can really occur only when society as a whole acknowledges principles that lie at the heart of modern conservatism. Right and wrong matters, individuals are responsible for their actions. Society has a right to be protected from those who prey on the innocent.
You know, the people that are complaining the loudest because now, yes, this recession which came upon us and was coming upon us for the last several years has increased what even our conservative estimates of the deficit was going to be, because every time you add 1 percent to the unemployment rolls, you add 25 to 27 billion dollars to the deficit. And yet, I don't recall any of them in those past years, when they were in control of both Houses of the Congress, ever protesting much about deficits. It seems to me that I remember hearing them say, "Oh, we don't have to worry about the national debt. We owe it to ourselves." And I remember them saying, "A little inflation each year is good for us. It maintains prosperity." Well, listening to the born-again budget-balancers moan about deficits now is kind of like hearing a mugger in Central Park complain about crime in the streets. [Laughter] I don't believe that I was sent to Washington to raise your taxes, and neither was the new majority in the United States Senate.
The cochairmen of this computer matching committee are a story in themselves. One of them is Dick Kusserow, a young FBI agent from Chicago brought here by Secretary Schweiker to be Inspector General at the Department of Health and Human Services. Dick had gained a reputation as one of the bureau's best experts on fraud against the government and organized crime cases. During his first 9 months in office here, he's come up with more than $230 million in estimated savings and prosecutions for fraud. Those prosecutions are already up over last year.
The other cochairman is Tom McBride, a dedicated prosecutor whose career moved him from the Manhattan District Attorney's office to the Kennedy Justice Department. His audits have found serious fraud and waste in CETA and other Labor Department programs. His recent drive against fraud and abuse in the Federal Employee Disability program brought more than 50 indictments in the last year alone. And, for the first time, really, Tom McBride is moving ahead with a program that will employ the rarely used powers of Federal statutes like the Rico Act to fight organized crime and infiltration into legitimate unions.
Never again will we shrink from denouncing the terrible nightmare totalitarianism has wrought: occupation of an entire section of Europe, genocide in Cambodia, boat people in Vietnam, a bloody invasion of Afghanistan, and everywhere the suppression of human rights and growing want from economic failure. We will not remain silent when, in Afghanistan, yellow rain is dropped on innocent people, solemn agreements are flagrantly broken, and Soviet helicopters drop thousands of "butterfly" mines? which maim and blind Afghan children who pick them up thinking they're toys. We will condemn these crimes and work for international repudiation.
What we did in California is what I recommend is the answer. We passed a law when I was Governor that said that anyone who commits a crime, if he had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used the gun or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence—and no probation, he had to go to prison. And I think that might take some of the guns out of the pockets of the criminals.
We will make specific proposals and we will solicit other ideas. In the area of crime, where we have double our proportionate share, we will propose legislation to give back to local communities the right to pass and enforce ordinances which will enable the police to more adequately protect these communities. Legislation already drafted will be submitted, calling upon the Legislature clearly to state in the future whether newly adopted laws are intended to preempt the right of local governments to legislate in the same field. Hopefully, this will free judges from having to guess the intent of those who passed the legislation in the first place.
When fiscally feasible, we hope to create a California crime technological foundation utilizing both public and private resources in a major effort to employ the most scientific techniques to control crime. At such a time, we should explore the idea of a state police academy to assure that police from even the smallest communities can have the most advanced training. We lead the nation in many things; we are going to stop leading in crime. Californians should be able to walk our streets safely day or night. The law abiding are entitled to at least as much protection as the lawbreakers.
While on the subject of crime – those with a grievance can seek redress in the courts or Legislature, but not in the streets. Lawlessness by the mob, as with the individual, will not be tolerated. We will act firmly and quickly to put down riot or insurrection wherever and whenever the situation requires.
Now, as long as they do that and as long as they, at the same time, have openly and publicly declared that the only morality they recognize is what will further their cause, meaning they reserve unto themselves the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, in order to attain that, and that is moral, not immoral, and we operate on a different set of standards, I think when you do business with them, even at a detente, you keep that in mind.
The President. Well, we had a very nice talk. And I told him that I believe that some of the things that we had tried in California served better, and that is to make the penalties for the carrying of a weapon, particularly in the commission of a crime, much stiffer than they are. California—we added 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence for anyone carrying a gun in the commission of a crime—convicted of that crime, whether they used the gun or not. And since, that's been augmented to include no probation—mandatory prison sentence.
So, I would like to see us directing our attention to what has caused us to have the crime that continues to increase as it has and is one of our major problems in the country today.
Finally, let me just say a word about a fourth kind of principle—the one that teaches us there really is a difference between right and wrong. I think it's time we took a good look at this moral side of contemporary schooling. How, for example, can we expect to restore educational excellence in schools still plagued by drug abuse and crime and chronic absenteeism?
So, too, the problem of crime—one as real and deadly serious as any in America today. It demands that we seek transformation of our legal system, which overly protects the rights of criminals while it leaves society and the innocent victims of crime without justice.
We need all of you now more than ever. I have always believed that this country—not always, but in recent years, I should say, believed that this country is hungering for a spiritual revival. I believe we need to build on what they're doing in Atlanta, where local churches have spearheaded a community effort, thousands of citizens, to help fight crime by serving as extra eyes and ears for the Atlanta police department, no longer turning their head away and saying, "I don't want to get involved."
And, finally, there's the problem of crime, a problem whose gravity cannot be underestimated. This administration has moved in its appointments to the Federal bench and in its legislative proposals for bail and parole reform to assist in the battle against the lawless. But we must always remember that our legal system does not need reform so much as it needs transformation. And this cannot occur at just the Federal level. It can really occur only when society as a whole acknowledges principles that lie at the heart of modern conservatism. Right and wrong matters, individuals are responsible for their actions. Society has a right to be protected from those who prey on the innocent.
Never again will we shrink from denouncing the terrible nightmare totalitarianism has wrought: occupation of an entire section of Europe, genocide in Cambodia, boat people in Vietnam, a bloody invasion of Afghanistan, and everywhere the suppression of human rights and growing want from economic failure. We will not remain silent when, in Afghanistan, yellow rain is dropped on innocent people, solemn agreements are flagrantly broken, and Soviet helicopters drop thousands of "butterfly" mines? which maim and blind Afghan children who pick them up thinking they're toys. We will condemn these crimes and work for international repudiation.
But I believe in California that we took the path of gun control that was best. I don't believe there's any way you can keep the criminal from getting a gun, just as you can't keep them from trying to steal anything they want. Now, the law that we passed in California, I heartily recommend to any society. We passed a law that said if a criminal is convicted of a crime and had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used it or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence. And on top of that, then passed another law that said no judge can find a prisoner guilty who had a gun in the commission of a crime, and then give him probation. He must go to prison. And I think making it so costly to carry a gun is far more enforceable than trying to keep them from getting it.
What we did in California is what I recommend is the answer. We passed a law when I was Governor that said that anyone who commits a crime, if he had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used the gun or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence—and no probation, he had to go to prison. And I think that might take some of the guns out of the pockets of the criminals.
At the level of government you deal with, the daily lives of your citizens, managing their schools, repairing their roads, protecting their neighborhoods from fire and crime—of course, Washington involves itself in these things too, but too often that kind of Federal intrusiveness has become part of the problem, not the solution.
The Congress also has before it now an omnibus crime bill whose provisions on bail reform, sentencing procedure, and criminal forfeiture are critical to our attempt to fight the growing problem of crime. We need that bill. It's critical to our efforts to control organized crime and the trade in illegal drugs and the street-corner criminals who promote that trade.
The President. My fellow Americans, those of you who tuned in a few weeks ago may remember that the topic of my broadcast was crime. Well, this week I'd like to narrow that subject down to drugs, an especially vicious virus of crime.
Now, regarding the other report I mentioned. In the next few days we'll announce the administration's new strategy for the prevention of drug abuse and drug trafficking. This is a bold, confident plan, and I'm elated. For too long the people in Washington took the attitude that the drug problem was so large nothing could be done about it. Well, we don't accept this sit-on-your-hands kind of thinking. We've decided to do more than pay lip service to the problem, and we started where narcotics crime was the worst: south Florida.
The time has also come for major reform of our criminal justice statutes and acceleration of the drive against organized crime and drug trafficking. It's high time that we make our cities safe again. This administration hereby declares an all-out war on big-time organized crime and the drug racketeers who are poisoning our young people. We will also implement recommendations of our Task Force on Victims of Crime, which will report to me this week.
Now, these broadcasts are not popular with governments of totalitarian powers. But make no mistake, we have a duty to broadcast. Aleksandr Herzen, the Russian writer, warned, "To shrink from saying a word in defense of the oppressed is as bad as any crime." Well, I pledge to you that America will stand up, speak out, and defend the values we share. To those who would crush religious freedom, our message is plain: You may jail your believers. You may close their churches, confiscate their Bibles, and harass their rabbis and priests, but you will never destroy the love of God and freedom that burns in their hearts. They will triumph over you.
Now, we conservatives have been warning about the crime problem for many years, about that permissive social philosophy that did so much to foster it, about a legal system that seemed to specialize in letting hardened criminals go free. And now we have the means and the power to do something. Let's get to work.
Now, the exclusionary rule—that isn't a law that was passed by Congress or a State legislature, it's what is called case law, the result of judicial decisions. If a law enforcement officer obtains evidence as the result of a violation of the laws regarding search and seizure, that evidence cannot be introduced in a trial even if it proves the guilt of the accused. Now, this is hardly punishment of the officer for his violation of legal procedures, and it's only effect, in many cases, is to free someone patently guilty of a crime.
Well, this administration has proposed vital reforms of our bail and parole systems and criminal forfeiture and sentencing statutes. These reforms were passed by the Senate 95 to 1 last year. Our anticrime package never got out of committee in the House of Representatives. Do you see a target there? [Laughter] The American people want these reforms, and they want them now. I'm asking tonight that you mobilize all the powerful resources of this political movement to get these measures passed by the Congress.
The President. What role should we play in preventing crime in this country? Well, now, basically, we know that law enforcement is a matter of State and local governments. For example, if someone is tried for murder, they're tried because they have violated the State law in that State against murder. The Federal Government, however, does have a part to play.
One of the great parts that we're playing is—more than half the crime in the United States is drug-related. And we tried an experiment in south Florida. We put, for the first time, we alined all the Federal agencies from drug enforcement to the FBI to the Federal marshals to all of this. And then we went and joined in with all the local and State apparatus down there. We had what we called a task force. And George Bush, the Vice President, was in charge of it.
But we have legislation, a crime package of bills, to try and straighten this out, try and make it more possible to evade these, just, technicalities and really get justice in sentencing criminals.
No group does more to promote gun safety and respect for the laws of this land than the NRA, and I thank you. Still, we've both heard the charge that supporting gunowners rights encourages a violent, shoot-em-up society. But just a minute. Don't they understand that most violent crimes are not committed by decent, law-abiding citizens? They're committed by career criminals. Guns don't make criminals. Hard-core criminals use guns. And locking them up, the hard-core criminals up, and throwing away the key is the best gun-control law we could ever have.
When I was Governor of California, we dealt with gun control—we added 5 to 15 years to the sentence of any criminal who, while committing a crime, had a gun in his possession, whether he used that gun or not. Now, I'm even more convinced than ever that this is the right approach if they're going to talk about something to do with guns and crime.
So, we have declared war on organized crime and the career criminal element in America. More than a hundred prosecutors' offices are working with special teams around the country to throw the book at career criminals in court. And we're determined to cripple the drug-pushers who are poisoning the minds and bodies of our children. We want mandatory sentences. We want firm and speedy application of penalties. And we want to abolish parole for Federal offenses. But there's one thing we do not want: We will never disarm any American who seeks to protect his or her family from fear and harm.
We are making headway in our crackdown on crime. A recent U.S. News and World Report story said that "It may be no accident that the first dip in U.S. crime totals in 5 years coincides with a nationwide crackdown on career criminals." Well, serious reported crime dropped by 4 percent in 1982, after rising more than 21 percent since 1977 and 254 percent since 1962.
Longer prison sentences and tougher treatment are beginning to pay dividends. And make no mistake: This is happening because you, the people, are fed up with crime. You're the ones who are organizing neighborhood patrols, supporting your local police, insisting that justice be carried out-and every time you do that, you keep the spirit of democracy strong in America.
May 15th marks the beginning of National Police Week. I urge you and every citizen to let our men and women in blue across America know we stand with them this week and every week of the year. Another way NRA can help police is to support our efforts for a minimum mandatory term of 5 years imprisonment—and perhaps there'll be some disagreement in this, but I have to say it: for the use of armor-piercing bullets during a Federal crime of violence. These are designed to truly be a threat to law enforcement officers who, so many times, have to depend on bulletproof vests.
The President. Well, I didn't turn anyone down. I have received no recommendation from the Justice Department for other pardons. I did receive the recommendation for the one gentleman. He had never committed a crime of any kind before. He was not, in any way, a ringleader or a great activist in the deed performed. He served his sentence and since then has lived up to the letter of the law and been a very fine, productive citizen. And those are the terms for pardoning someone, so we pardoned him.
Bill [Bill Plante, CBS News]?
Mr. President, it is my sense that the people of EPA who have stayed with it from the beginning are there because of their belief in the fundamental importance of their mission. EPA was not created to deal with the usual mix of social problems, whether they be poverty, jobs, housing, education, crime. In a real sense, EPA's mission transcends all of these. That mission is the preservation of life itself. The career people of EPA recognize better than the rest of us the necessity of harmonizing their mission with the essentials of the life they're trying to preserve. They know the single-minded pursuit of any social goal to the exclusion of all others can cause severe societal distortions. They are willing and uniquely able to help our country avoid those distortions if so charged.
In fact, if anything, I'm a little disturbed that focusing on gun control as an answer to the crime problem today could very well be diverting us from really paying attention to what needs to be done if we're to solve the crime problem.
Ms. Thomas. Which is?
The President. Well, we had a very nice talk. And I told him that I believe that some of the things that we had tried in California served better, and that is to make the penalties for the carrying of a weapon, particularly in the commission of a crime, much stiffer than they are. California—we added 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence for anyone carrying a gun in the commission of a crime—convicted of that crime, whether they used the gun or not. And since, that's been augmented to include no probation—mandatory prison sentence.
So, I would like to see us directing our attention to what has caused us to have the crime that continues to increase as it has and is one of our major problems in the country today.
But I believe in California that we took the path of gun control that was best. I don't believe there's any way you can keep the criminal from getting a gun, just as you can't keep them from trying to steal anything they want. Now, the law that we passed in California, I heartily recommend to any society. We passed a law that said if a criminal is convicted of a crime and had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used it or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence. And on top of that, then passed another law that said no judge can find a prisoner guilty who had a gun in the commission of a crime, and then give him probation. He must go to prison. And I think making it so costly to carry a gun is far more enforceable than trying to keep them from getting it.
What we did in California is what I recommend is the answer. We passed a law when I was Governor that said that anyone who commits a crime, if he had in his possession a gun at the time he committed the crime, whether he used the gun or not, add 5 to 15 years to the prison sentence—and no probation, he had to go to prison. And I think that might take some of the guns out of the pockets of the criminals.
The President. We get back to the old argument again—and I have stated many times—you cannot find in the States, the various States that have gun control laws, that there is any proportionate difference in the crimes committed where there are those very strict laws and where they are far looser in their laws.
The President. Sure would have been more comfortable, except that at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, thereabouts, out there surrounded by many of you, he did what he did in an area that has about the strictest gun control laws that there are in the United States. Now, how effective are gun control laws for someone that wants to commit a crime using a gun when he could choose the place where there's supposed to be least likely to have one?
No group does more to promote gun safety and respect for the laws of this land than the NRA, and I thank you. Still, we've both heard the charge that supporting gunowners rights encourages a violent, shoot-em-up society. But just a minute. Don't they understand that most violent crimes are not committed by decent, law-abiding citizens? They're committed by career criminals. Guns don't make criminals. Hard-core criminals use guns. And locking them up, the hard-core criminals up, and throwing away the key is the best gun-control law we could ever have.
When I was Governor of California, we dealt with gun control—we added 5 to 15 years to the sentence of any criminal who, while committing a crime, had a gun in his possession, whether he used that gun or not. Now, I'm even more convinced than ever that this is the right approach if they're going to talk about something to do with guns and crime.
So, we have declared war on organized crime and the career criminal element in America. More than a hundred prosecutors' offices are working with special teams around the country to throw the book at career criminals in court. And we're determined to cripple the drug-pushers who are poisoning the minds and bodies of our children. We want mandatory sentences. We want firm and speedy application of penalties. And we want to abolish parole for Federal offenses. But there's one thing we do not want: We will never disarm any American who seeks to protect his or her family from fear and harm.
We are making headway in our crackdown on crime. A recent U.S. News and World Report story said that "It may be no accident that the first dip in U.S. crime totals in 5 years coincides with a nationwide crackdown on career criminals." Well, serious reported crime dropped by 4 percent in 1982, after rising more than 21 percent since 1977 and 254 percent since 1962.
Longer prison sentences and tougher treatment are beginning to pay dividends. And make no mistake: This is happening because you, the people, are fed up with crime. You're the ones who are organizing neighborhood patrols, supporting your local police, insisting that justice be carried out-and every time you do that, you keep the spirit of democracy strong in America.
May 15th marks the beginning of National Police Week. I urge you and every citizen to let our men and women in blue across America know we stand with them this week and every week of the year. Another way NRA can help police is to support our efforts for a minimum mandatory term of 5 years imprisonment—and perhaps there'll be some disagreement in this, but I have to say it: for the use of armor-piercing bullets during a Federal crime of violence. These are designed to truly be a threat to law enforcement officers who, so many times, have to depend on bulletproof vests.
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
The President. Yes. I remember back in California I only had for one brief period—a year or so—a bare majority in both houses of the legislature. But to show you what that difference meant, in that single year, after we attained that bare majority, we passed 41 anticrime bills. All of them had been buried in a committee operated and controlled by the majority until that change where we became the majority; they weren't new bills at all. And strangely enough, those 41 bills that had been lying buried in those committees, once they were brought out in the open on the floor, there weren't very many people that dared to vote against them.
The President. Well, I don't think that it is a no-limit thing, but I'd like to point something out. Yes, I was shot here in the District of Columbia, where the gun control laws are probably as strict as they are anyplace in the United States, where everything about the possession of that gun and having it on his person was against the law. If you will check those States, such as New York, with all the great gun control laws that they have—check the use of guns in crime in those States against States like some Western States like in Arizona, where there is very little of what we would think is control.
Now, if you remember back in England some years ago—lately there's been some talk that now we see the English bobbies having guns and all. What has changed? Well, back in another day when they didn't carry guns in England, in the old times, the carrying of a gun in the commission of a crime, you were tried not for the crime that you'd committed; you were tried for murder. It was considered that you had shown the intent to use that weapon by carrying it in the commission of the crime. And therefore, a fellow that was only a burglar said, "Wait a minute. I don't want to get threatened with hanging if I'm caught with a gun in my pocket." So the criminals didn't carry guns, and the police didn't have to carry guns.
George Bush knows the importance of the values expressed in the Pledge of Allegiance. He cares that the courts won't allow children in public schools to open their day with a simple, silent, voluntary prayer. He believes that we must have judges on our courts who interpret the law and don't try to legislate, and who care not just about the rights of criminals but about those of the victims of crime. And that's why the man I want to be the next President of the United States is George Bush.
George Bush believes that public schoolchildren should be allowed to open their day with a voluntary prayer, something the Federal courts won't allow. He believes that we must have judges who interpret the law, not rewrite it, and who care not just for the rights of criminals but have compassion for the decent citizens who are victims of crime. And the Vice President knows the importance to our nation and to our children of the values expressed in the simple words "one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all."
But there's more. In this election, one of the candidates believes that no matter how horrible or brutal the crime, he opposes capital punishment.
The President. Well, George Bush believes that for the most horrible crimes, like when a drug dealer murders a policeman in cold blood, that kind of dealer—or killer deserves and should receive the death sentence. And if you ask me, there are no Americans braver and no citizens more precious than the men and women who guard us—our State and local police. And George Bush and I stand behind them all the way.
You know, violent crime has fallen significantly since 1981 because George and I put criminals on notice. We said make a false move, and the next sound you hear is the clang of a jail cell door slamming shut. Of course, what happens in Massachusetts is a little bit different. In that State, and only in that State, first-degree murderers not even eligible for parole were let free on weekend passes, and some of them never bothered to return. Do you call that justice?
Besides fighting crime and restoring our economy, we've made sure that once again America is respected in the world, our Armed Forces are strong, and our nation is at peace. We and our NATO allies stood firm in the face of Soviet missiles pointing at the heart of Europe and Asia. And Mr. Gorbachev got the message. He did business because he knew we meant business. And we still mean business.
Yes, the bottom line in this election is that Chic Hecht is a strong conservative, and unlike his opponent, he will never have to take orders from the liberal leadership of the other party. And that makes a difference not just on taxes and national security but also when it comes to confirming judges and fighting crime, two issues where the liberal leadership in Congress has gone so far left that today voting against them has become a matter of self-defense.
George Bush knows the importance of the values expressed in the Pledge of Allegiance. He cares that courts won't allow children in public schools to open their day with a simple, silent, voluntary prayer. He believes that we must have judges on our courts who interpret the law and don't try to legislate, and who care not just about the rights of the criminals but about those of the victims of crime.
You know, violent crime has fallen significantly since 1981 because George and I put criminals on notice. We said: Make a false move, and the next sound you hear is the clang of a jail cell door slamming shut. But in this election, one of the candidates believes that no matter how horrible or brutal the crime, he opposes capital punishment. Audience members. Booo!
The President. Well, if you ask me, there are no Americans braver and no citizens more precious than the men and women who guard us: our State and local police. And George Bush and I stand behind them all the way, as I know you do. And that's why George and I believe that for horrible crimes, like a drug dealer who murders a policeman in cold blood—that kind of killer deserves and should receive the death penalty.
First, let's talk about crime and the right to bear arms. Our team believes that law-abiding people who want to protect their home and family have a constitutional right to own guns. But the liberals favor gun control.Audience members. Booo!
The President. We believe in strong judges who respect the Constitution and who are serious about fighting crime. Violent crime has fallen sharply in this country since 1981—I don't know why I picked that year— [laughter] —because we put criminals on notice. We said: Make a false move, and the next sound you hear is the clang of a jail cell door slamming shut.
The liberals say they're on your side, even when no matter how horrible or brutal the crime, they oppose capital punishment. Is that the side you're on?Audience members. No!
Permit me to close by mentioning two vital matters that are now before the Congress. The first is a subject of special concern to senior citizens—crime.
The reason crime is so bad is no mystery. For too many years the scales of criminal justice were tilted in favor of the criminals themselves. Those in charge forgot, or just plain didn't care, about protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens. We came to Washington determined to restore the proper balance to our criminal justice system. And we've begun to get results.
In 1982 the crime rate dropped by 4.3 percent, and that was the biggest decline in a decade. But we still face a tremendous challenge. One of the most important steps we've proposed is the comprehensive control act and the most sweeping anticrime bill in more than 10 years. Recently, the Senate passed the crime control act and several important related crime bills. But in the House, instead of giving those bills the priority they deserve, the leadership has bottled them up in committee.
Well, these crime bills that we're talking about should be above partisan politics. And I urge you to help me tell the American people what the House leadership is doing. If we hold a few feet to the fire, certain Members of the Congress might finally realize that the American people want action. I've said repeatedly, you don't have to make them see the light; just make them feel the heat. [Laughter]
Strength in the economy, a firm sense of purpose in foreign affairs, the will to combat crime and seek God's help—it all adds up to a great national renewal, a reaffirmation of the fundamental American values of hard work, family, freedom, and faith.
Fifth, a comprehensive anticrime package to crack down on criminals through restrictions on bail, tougher sentencing, and stricter enforcement of drug trafficking laws.
To combat crime, our administration has increased the law enforcement budget by more than 20 percent, established 12 regional drug task forces around the country, and hired more than 1,900 new investigators and prosecutors. We've also reasserted some very basic values—values that say there is such a thing as right and wrong, that the innocent victim is entitled to as much protection under the law as the accused, that individual actions do matter, and that, yes, for hardened criminals preying on our society, punishment must be certain and swift.
And now that we're getting back to these fundamentals of our Judeo-Christian tradition, the will of the people is at last being done. In 1982 reported crime dropped 3 percent—the first decline since 1977. And last year reported crime dropped 7 percent, and this is the first time the serious crime index has ever shown a drop for the second year in a row, and the sharpest decline in crime statistics since 1960.
As I'm sure you've already heard, not only do we reduce the deficit by nearly $70 billion, we also provide nearly $50 billion in increased spending. This is made possible by combining new revenues with previously scheduled reductions and savings in other areas. And let me stress that these savings do not involve reducing benefits to those who need them. In our budget there are more funds for improving air safety, fighting crime, and providing housing for the poor. There is another $600 million for the war on drugs. Funding for AIDS research and prevention is increased by 24 percent. And money to clean up toxic waste goes up by a fifth. We also increase funds for the science and space programs and for basic biomedical research. And student-aid funds are increased again, bringing them to a level 83 percent higher than where they stood in 1980.
In the last month, there was a radio address to the Nation on Labor Day, a TV address on the economy, a news conference that covered the waterfront of issues. I've had an opportunity to do some traveling, to talk to union members in Chicago about the housing industry, to help get Westway started in New York City, assist at the dedication of President Ford's museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and to talk to the Republican women leaders in Denver about Wall Street and Main Street. Last week in New Orleans, I announced some major initiatives on crime and also spoke to the World Bank conference about our new development policy. And when I leave you—and I regret that I have to be here so briefly—I'm going to be speaking to the National Alliance of Business about mobilizing the private sector to assist the underprivileged.
But let me just give you an example if I can—and then I'm going to do something else here—an example of what this man has in his background and what he has done for the State of California. For about 7 of the 8 years I had a hostile legislature. The opposing party had a majority in both houses. Now, maybe many of you haven't thought about this, but in the structure of government the party that has the greatest number of members of the assembly and of the senate in each case has the majority of each committee and names the chairmen of those committees. Well, one year, due to some special elections, we wound up with a bare majority in both houses. And that year, now that we had the majority in the committees and the chairmen of the committees, out of one committee that was literally a burial ground for good legislation came 41 anticrime pieces of legislation. Almost all of them, if not all, were authored by this man.
They had been buried in that committee as long as the other fellows were in charge, and they came out of that committee to the floor, and then once out on the floor even the other side that had bottled them up in committee—where they could be kind of anonymous in doing it—didn't have the nerve to vote against them. And in that 1 year we passed 41 pieces of anticrime legislation.
And the polls that not too long ago said that inflation was the number-one problem-they don't say that anymore, because inflation for the last 7 months has been running at 5.4 percent, not 12.4 percent. I just wanted to get in that lick because— [laughter] —because I also wanted to emphasize that now, near the top if not the top of many polls, the problem on people's minds is crime. And I think the moment has come when a man with the experience, George Deukmejian, should be the Governor of the State of California.
Looking beyond the economy, there are several other pieces of unfinished business which must also be addressed in this final session of the 97th Congress. The priorities I outlined to the leaders this morning included the following: the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which is so important to our relations with our neighbors to the south and which I'll be discussing with them in the next few days; and of great importance, I'm asking that the Congress provide funding so that our MX program can begin on schedule. Then there is the Clean Air Act, nuclear waste disposal, a revision of our bankruptcy laws, regulatory reform and immigration reform, Radio Marti, and the anticrime bill already passed by the Senate.
The President. Well, I imagine that what they're probably looking into is, are they people who were strictly political prisoners. Because, you know, at the Mariel lift, at the time when so many came flooding in, Mr. Castro filled their ranks—or didn't fill their ranks, but infiltrated among them even mental patients and people who were guilty of horrendous crimes—not political prisoners at all. And then we had a tremendous job—that isn't finished yet—of trying to find people that were just outright violent criminals who had been sent here as political refugees. So, this might be what they're looking into with regard to these others. Earlier it was mentioned that we've had some meetings with some of the clergy from Cuba, and we voiced our belief to them, particularly about one man, in particular, and if they had any influence on Castro—and that one man has been released.
The President. Well, I have no plans for such a thing, but we continue to, again, listen. And I think some investigation is going forward in our own Justice Department to see if we can find out, because we do have some laws that are based on war crimes. And so we are trying to find out for ourselves legally what his position is.
And so, I have put it this way: that you don't stop loving your mother because you've taken unto yourself a wife. So, the people in America do have a feeling for the countries of their heritage. In my case, it was a great-grandfather on one side and a grandmother and grandfather on my mother's side. Well, Americans retain that feeling of friendship and loyalty to the countries that, as I say, are their heritage. And so, when we feel that people are being unjustly treated—imprisoned for something that in our country would not be a crime, calling for such a sentence—our people get aroused, and they come to us, and they want help. They want something done.
Samuel Gompers, who founded the American Federation of Labor and who literally gave his life to that cause, said, "Doing for people what they can and ought to do for themselves is a dangerous experiment. In the last analysis the welfare of the workers depends upon their own initiative. Whatever is done under the guise of philanthropy or social morality which in any way lessens initiative is the greatest crime that can be committed against the toilers. Let social busybodies and professional public morals experts in their fads reflect upon the perils they rashly invite under the pretense of social welfare."
We've gone astray from first principles. We've lost sight of the rule that individual freedom and ingenuity are at the very core of everything that we've accomplished. Government's first duty is to protect the people, not run their lives. What have been some of the results of this straying from basic principles? Well, for one, violent crime has surged 10 percent, making neighborhood streets unsafe and families fearful in their homes. We've been left with a legacy of almost 8 million people out of work—666,000 of them construction workers. All of these people have been robbed of a basic human dignity and forced into the humiliation of unemployment. The annual inflation rate has soared to nearly 12 percent, making a mockery of hard work and savings. And our national debt has grown to more than $950 billion despite taxes that eat up an ever-increasing share of the family dollar.
So, too, the problem of crime—one as real and deadly serious as any in America today. It demands that we seek transformation of our legal system, which overly protects the rights of criminals while it leaves society and the innocent victims of crime without justice.
And, finally, there's the problem of crime, a problem whose gravity cannot be underestimated. This administration has moved in its appointments to the Federal bench and in its legislative proposals for bail and parole reform to assist in the battle against the lawless. But we must always remember that our legal system does not need reform so much as it needs transformation. And this cannot occur at just the Federal level. It can really occur only when society as a whole acknowledges principles that lie at the heart of modern conservatism. Right and wrong matters, individuals are responsible for their actions. Society has a right to be protected from those who prey on the innocent.
You know, the people that are complaining the loudest because now, yes, this recession which came upon us and was coming upon us for the last several years has increased what even our conservative estimates of the deficit was going to be, because every time you add 1 percent to the unemployment rolls, you add 25 to 27 billion dollars to the deficit. And yet, I don't recall any of them in those past years, when they were in control of both Houses of the Congress, ever protesting much about deficits. It seems to me that I remember hearing them say, "Oh, we don't have to worry about the national debt. We owe it to ourselves." And I remember them saying, "A little inflation each year is good for us. It maintains prosperity." Well, listening to the born-again budget-balancers moan about deficits now is kind of like hearing a mugger in Central Park complain about crime in the streets. [Laughter] I don't believe that I was sent to Washington to raise your taxes, and neither was the new majority in the United States Senate.
With protection of young people in mind, Bill declared war on crime and went on the offensive against drugs. And finally, a subject close to my heart: Bill Clements has been one of the most responsive Governors in the 50 States in our efforts to promote voluntarism. Building on that frontier spirit for which Texas is famous, he has been encouraging people to get involved, to help one another, to take more responsibility for their family and community. He's promoted the use of volunteers and direct citizen involvement in mental health and human resource programs.
Mr. Canfield. Yes, Mr. President. This is Roger Canfield, suburban Sacramento. And we're concerned out here with what government can do about crime, considering that's the purpose of government, to protect our life and property. I'm running against a guy out here who's against the death penalty and voted for reduced penalties for rape.
The President. Roger, they're going to think this is a frame-up. I just went over to the Justice Department this morning and made a speech in an auditorium to an assembled audience there—many of them having to do with law enforcement—and announced an eight-point crime program.
Now, I recognize that the Federal Government can only do so much in that because most of our criminal statutes are State statutes and, therefore, it is local law enforcement and local and State government that has to do with that. But our eight-point crime program is aimed at organized crime. We have had a tremendous success with a brand new kind of task force in south Florida, where about 80 percent of the drugs that were coming in from the other countries were coming in through south Florida. And our task force lined up local and State government and our Federal forces, even up to and including military, giving us tracking of boats and planes that were bringing in drugs. And we literally have stopped it cold there.
Now, of course, the drug runners are seeking out other entry points in the country. So, part of our program this morning called for 12 such task forces, nationwide, to go after this, as well as the program against organized crime.
q. Mr. President, do you share the view of elected officials in Miami that the rioting there over the holidays was brought on as much by joblessness and economic hardship as by racial tensions? And if you don't share that view, do you see any danger in people with their backs up against the wall in this recession venting their frustration in acts of crime and violence?
The President. I would hate to see that happen. And it certainly would bespeak a difference in the character of our people, because in the Great Depression nothing like that ever took place, when the situation was much worse and there was no unemployment insurance and there was no—for a time—not even any welfare programs of any kind to help out.
I think, though, that when responsible leaders, supposedly, publicly voice their opinion that this is going to happen, they're encouraging it. And I think they ought to think again before they open their mouths.
Or, to take another major social problem, I know all of us were relieved to see recently that crime had actually declined by 4 percent in 1982, the sharpest decline in 5 years. The Director of the FBI, William Webster, has suggested that these new figures may well show that volunteer action through citizen crime prevention groups is having an impact on the problem.
In Philadelphia there are now 581 crime prevention groups. That's up from 167 only a couple of years ago. Here in New York, there are more than 151,000 Volunteers in 13 types of programs. And lest some of you are peering closely and thinking that might be an early campaign button, I just this morning met with one of those crime groups. And they kind of gave me an honorary member[ship] in the Crime Stoppers.
Yes, I think America is a place of many social and economic problems. And, believe me, in my job I hear a lot about them. But I think it's also good for us to remind ourselves and others that our society makes it possible to contend with the recession and crime even while we offer hope to a Linn Yann and to all those living in oppression and tyranny.
No group does more to promote gun safety and respect for the laws of this land than the NRA, and I thank you. Still, we've both heard the charge that supporting gunowners rights encourages a violent, shoot-em-up society. But just a minute. Don't they understand that most violent crimes are not committed by decent, law-abiding citizens? They're committed by career criminals. Guns don't make criminals. Hard-core criminals use guns. And locking them up, the hard-core criminals up, and throwing away the key is the best gun-control law we could ever have.
When I was Governor of California, we dealt with gun control—we added 5 to 15 years to the sentence of any criminal who, while committing a crime, had a gun in his possession, whether he used that gun or not. Now, I'm even more convinced than ever that this is the right approach if they're going to talk about something to do with guns and crime.
So, we have declared war on organized crime and the career criminal element in America. More than a hundred prosecutors' offices are working with special teams around the country to throw the book at career criminals in court. And we're determined to cripple the drug-pushers who are poisoning the minds and bodies of our children. We want mandatory sentences. We want firm and speedy application of penalties. And we want to abolish parole for Federal offenses. But there's one thing we do not want: We will never disarm any American who seeks to protect his or her family from fear and harm.
We are making headway in our crackdown on crime. A recent U.S. News and World Report story said that "It may be no accident that the first dip in U.S. crime totals in 5 years coincides with a nationwide crackdown on career criminals." Well, serious reported crime dropped by 4 percent in 1982, after rising more than 21 percent since 1977 and 254 percent since 1962.
Longer prison sentences and tougher treatment are beginning to pay dividends. And make no mistake: This is happening because you, the people, are fed up with crime. You're the ones who are organizing neighborhood patrols, supporting your local police, insisting that justice be carried out-and every time you do that, you keep the spirit of democracy strong in America.
May 15th marks the beginning of National Police Week. I urge you and every citizen to let our men and women in blue across America know we stand with them this week and every week of the year. Another way NRA can help police is to support our efforts for a minimum mandatory term of 5 years imprisonment—and perhaps there'll be some disagreement in this, but I have to say it: for the use of armor-piercing bullets during a Federal crime of violence. These are designed to truly be a threat to law enforcement officers who, so many times, have to depend on bulletproof vests.
In the area of public order and law enforcement, for example, we're reversing a dangerous trend of the last decade. While crime was steadily increasing, the Federal commitment in terms of personnel was steadily shrinking. This administration has reversed this trend by adding more than 1,000 new investigators and prosecutors to law enforcement rolls, and we have redirected our resources for a frontal assault on drugs and organized crime. Or take our federalism proposals: We want to cut back on Federal intrusions to local and State governments, and so those local and State governments can be more responsive to the people.
The President. Well, I didn't turn anyone down. I have received no recommendation from the Justice Department for other pardons. I did receive the recommendation for the one gentleman. He had never committed a crime of any kind before. He was not, in any way, a ringleader or a great activist in the deed performed. He served his sentence and since then has lived up to the letter of the law and been a very fine, productive citizen. And those are the terms for pardoning someone, so we pardoned him.
Bill [Bill Plante, CBS News]?
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
What kind of freedom have the Sandinistas established? Just ask the 1,300 stevedores at the Nicaraguan port of Corinto. Last month, their union assembly was packed with Sandinistas, and six union leaders were arrested. Their presumed crime was trying to develop ties with independent trade unions, including some here affiliated with the AFL-CIO. I can tell you one thing, if all the longshoremen in Corinto are like Teddy Gleason, the Sandinistas have got a real fight on their hands.
Recently, we've passed through a painful era in American history when it seemed that many of our proudest values and most important institutions were called into question. It's my personal belief that as mindless and destructive as some of the criticism was, its final result has been not only a reaffirmation of those institutions and those values but a new and greater understanding and appreciation for their usefulness and their meaning. The FBI will continue to look to the future, to use the latest and most sophisticated techniques to fight organized crime, white-collar crime, terrorism-in short, to do what needs to be done to protect the law-abiding people of the United States.
The challenge of crime today in America is a grave one. As you know, upon entering office this administration addressed itself immediately to the economic crisis that we were facing at that time as well as to the dangerous decline that had taken place in our Nation's national security and military strength. Yet even while we worked on these difficult problems we still kept work on the Nation's crime problem foremost in our minds.
Last year, when I announced at the Justice Department our eight-point program for attacking this problem, I was pleased to be able to announce a very sizable expansion of Justice Department personnel, including for the first time in many years additional agents for the FBI. We're now moving forward with other elements of the crime program, and we're doing so methodically and carefully but with one goal in mind. The recent increase in the drug trade, which has led to your new role in this battle, is really a reflection of an even deeper problem: the criminal networks and syndicates that have been tolerated in America for too long. I can only repeat to you that we're going after organized crime, root and branch. Our goal is to break the power of the mob in America and nothing short of it. We mean to end their profits, imprison their members, and cripple their organization.
There isn't time to outline all that we're trying to do to give back to you, the American people, control over your own lives and destinies. Even as we fight to restore prosperity at home and our prestige abroad, we're dealing firmly and imaginatively with the menace of crime and drugs that has cost us so dearly, especially here in Texas. We've expanded the success of the South Florida Task Force by establishing 12 similar task forces throughout the Nation, including one in Houston. That means more than 1,200 new investigators and prosecutors will be cracking down on the drug racketeers.
We're launching a frontal assault on organized crime with the recent appointment of a Kefauver-style commission, headed by a distinguished jurist, that will hold regional hearings throughout the country.
But despite the savagery of their crime, the universal reaction against it, and the evidence of their complicity, the Soviets still refuse to tell the truth. They have persistently refused to admit that their pilot fired on the Korean aircraft. Indeed, they've not even told their own people that a plane was shot down.
We have joined with other countries to press the International Civil Aviation Organization to investigate this crime at an urgent special session of the Council. At the same time, we're listening most carefully to private groups, both American and international, airline pilots, passenger associations, and others, who have a special interest in civil air safety.
