We had a program in California—again, I call on that. We had an education program in the schools. We had former drug users who had straightened out. We found that they were most effective in talking to young people. You could go in, I could go in, anyone else and try to talk to these young people and tell them the harm in this and get nowhere. But when someone stood in front of them who said, "I've been there, and this what it was like, and this is why I'm standing here telling you today," we found they listened.
I am opposed with every fiber of my being to discrimination, and to have set in law the fact that tax exemptions could be denied to schools that—and educational institutions that practiced discrimination. Now, as I say, it probably wasn't handled as well as it could, because, it being in our minds a procedural matter—and in my mind, certainly—we didn't anticipate that it was going to be as misinterpreted as it was. And what we have accomplished with what we did was we've prevented the IRS from determining national social policy all by itself. It'll now be by elected officials, the Congress.
I have already explained myself with regard to the discrimination in education, and I think that my record will stand for itself, if anyone wants to look at it, that I have been on the side of opposition to bigotry and discrimination and prejudice—and long before it ever became a kind of national issue under the title of civil rights. And my life has been spent on that side.
The President. No, I don't believe so. All we're doing is what every administration before us has done and we hadn't been doing. It's simply a case so that we all know what is going on. And, also, we've seen the situation when it would have been very, I think, educational for the people and advantageous for us if two or three particular issues could have been brought before the public; and because of not checking with each other, we found three separate departments all going at once with their statements.
We're cutting the size of the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
That's why we support and endorse a program of tuition tax credits, so that our independent schools and our country as a whole will prosper. We need diversity and excellence. As economist Thomas Sowell has suggested, these tuition tax credits are especially important "to those who are mentioned the least: the poor and the working class." As the cost of education has skyrocketed, it is these groups that have been particularly hard hit by the double burden of supporting private and public schools.
And let me add here that far from being a threat to the public school system, these tax credits will serve only to raise the standards of the competing school systems. As a New York Times editorial pointed out recently, the mere threat of tax credits "served to jolt public education out of its lethargy. In New York and other places, public schools now show encouraging signs of improvement."
Today, 5 million American kids attend private schools because of the emphasis on religious values and educational standards. The overwhelming majority of these schools are church-supported—Catholic, Protestant, and Jewish. And the majority of students are from families earning less than $25,000. In many parochial schools the majority of students are from minority neighborhoods. In addition to private tuition, these families also pay their full share of taxes to fired the public schools. I think they're entitled to some relief, since they're supporting two school systems and only using one.
Last year, as a matter of tax equity, we introduced legislation to give these families a break. We don't seek to aid the rich, but those lower- and middle-income families who are most strapped by taxes and the recession. In proposing tuition tax credits, we hope to provide greater choice and wider educational opportunity for our children. The Congress failed to pass the measure we proposed, but we're not giving up. In the coming session, we will again work to secure passage of tuition tax credits.
You know, we were frustrated on two other fronts last year. There are 5 million American children attending private schools today because of emphasis on religious values and educational standards. Their families, most of whom earn less than $25,000 a year, pay private tuition, and they also pay their full share of taxes to fund the public schools. We think they're entitled to relief. So, I want you to know that shortly, we'll be sending legislation back up to the Hill, and we will begin the struggle all over again to secure tuition tax credits for deserving families.
That's what's happening with CBN and the 700 Club's "Operation Blessing." They've given nearly $2 1/2 million to more than 8,500 churches, and this money is then matched by the local churches. The result has been fantastic: More than 100,000 needy families helped, either through direct or in-kind contributions, ranging from food and clothing to education, dental care, and housework,
On another front, all of you know how vitally important it is for us to reverse the decline in American education, to take responsibility for the education of our children out of the hands of the bureaucrats and put it back in the hands of parents and teachers. That's why the Congress must stop dithering. We need those tuition tax credits. We need a voucher system for the parents of disadvantaged children. We need education savings accounts, a sort of IRA for college. And finally—and don't think for a moment I've given up—we need to eliminate that unnecessary and politically engendered Department of Education.
But whether it's cutting spending and taxing, shrinking the size of the deficit, ending overregulation, inefficiency, fraud, and waste in government, cracking down on career criminals, revitalizing American education, pressing for prayer and abortion legislation, I think you can see that the agenda we've put before America these past 2 years has been a conservative one. Oh, and there are two other matters that I think you'd be interested in. First, as part of our federalism effort, next week we will be sending to the Congress our proposal for four megablock grants that will return vital prerogatives to the States where they belong. And second, the Office of Management and Budget will press ahead with new regulations prohibiting the use of Federal tax dollars for purposes of political advocacy.
Families stand at the center of our society. And every family has a personal stake in promoting excellence in education. Excellence does not begin in Washington. A 600-percent increase in Federal spending on education between 1960 and 1980 was accompanied by a steady decline in Scholastic Aptitude Test scores. Excellence must begin in our homes and neighborhood schools, where it's the responsibility of every parent and teacher and the right of every child.
Our children come first, and that's why I established a bipartisan National Commission on Excellence in Education, to help us chart a commonsense course for better education. And already, communities are implementing the Commission's recommendations. Schools are reporting progress in math and reading skills. But we must do more to restore discipline to schools; and we must encourage the teaching of new basics, reward teachers of merit, enforce tougher standards, and put our parents back in charge.
I will continue to press for tuition tax credits to expand opportunities for families and to soften the double payment for those paying public school taxes and private school tuition. Our proposal would target assistance to low- and middle-income families. Just as more incentives are needed within our schools, greater competition is needed among our schools. Without standards and competition, there can be no champions, no records broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.
Economic recovery, better education, rededication to values, all show the spirit of renewal gaining the upper hand. And all will improve family life in the eighties. But families need more. They need assurance that they and their loved ones can walk the streets of America without being afraid. Parents need to know their children will not be victims of child pornography and abduction. This year we will intensify our drive against these and other horrible crimes like sexual abuse and family violence.
During the last decade, we've seen people's commitment to religious liberty expressed by the establishment of thousands of new religious schools. These schools were built by the sacrifices of parents determined to provide a quality education for their children in an environment that permits traditional values to flourish.
Now I believe that some of you met with my advisers to discuss the situation of religious schools in Nebraska. We have all seen news accounts of the jailing of a minister, the padlocking of a church, and the continuing imprisonment of fathers of students. This issue of religious liberty has arisen in other States. The question is how to find the balance between assuring quality of education and preserving freedom for churches and parents who want their schools to reflect their faith.
But it is an honor to be with you today. For more than four decades, the National Association of Evangelicals has ministered to the people of this country in the name of God's word. And today, the NAE has some 38,000 member churches representing some 4 million Americans, as you well know. You provide Christian education, foreign missions, religious broadcasting, and as you were just told, the provision of a very worthwhile safety net—a host of other services. In doing so, you are leaders in promoting fundamental American values of hard work, family, freedom, and faith. And on behalf of a grateful nation, I thank you.
Second, we must restore education in basic value to America's schools. Since our administration put education at the top of the national agenda, we've seen a grassroots revolution that promises to strengthen every school in the country. Across the land, parents, teachers, school administrators, State and local officeholders have begun work to improve the fundamentals-not frills in the curriculum, but basic teaching and learning. As this great educational reform takes place, we must make certain that we not only improve instruction in math and science, but in justice, religion, discipline, and liberty, for to guide America into the 21st century, our children will need not only technical skills but wisdom.
And because parents know best what schools are right for their children, our administration has proposed education vouchers and tuition tax credits—concepts that the American people overwhelmingly support. And I intend to keep pressing for those reforms until they're passed.
We've had a program to aid the black colleges and universities; because when I came here, I said I think they're such a part of history—they fulfilled a need for so long when there was discrimination that made the advantage of education hard to get for many of our minorities—that they must, that institution must be preserved. And we've been working on that.
Mr. Mondale. Well, that's exactly the commitment that was made to the American people in 1980: He would never reduce benefits. And of course, what happened right after the election is they proposed to cut Social Security benefits by 25 percent-reducing the adjustment for inflation, cutting out minimum benefits for the poorest on Social Security, removing educational benefits for dependents whose widows were trying--with widows trying to get them through college. Everybody remembers that; people know what happened.
I think they also know that we had a commission that came in a year ago with a recommendation on education--on excellence in education. And today, without the Federal Government being involved other than passing on to them, the school districts, the words from that commission, we find 35 States with task forces now dealing with their educational problems. We find that schools are extending the curriculum to now have forced teaching of mathematics and science and so forth. All of these things have brought an improvement in the college entrance exams for the first time in some 20 years.
Some time ago, Mr. Mondale said something about education and college students and help of that kind. Half--one out of two of the full-time college students in the United States are receiving some form of Federal aid. But there, again, we found people that there under the previous administration, families that had no limit to income were still eligible for low-interest college loans. We didn't think that was right. And so, we have set a standard that those loans and those grants are directed to the people who otherwise could not go to college, their family incomes were so low.
Number two, we have to work with cities and others to help generate economic growth in those communities--through the Urban Development Action Grant Program. I don't mind those enterprise zones; let's try them, but not as a substitute for the others. Certainly education and training is crucial. If these young Americans don't have the skills that make them attractive to employees, they're not going to get jobs.
Mr. Mondale. I think the American people want to make certain that that dollar is wisely spent. I think they stand for civil rights. I know they're all for education in science and training, which I strongly support. They want these young people to have a chance to get jobs and the rest. I think the business community wants to get involved. I think they're asking for new and creative ways to try to reach it with everyone involved. I think that's part of it. I think also that the American people want a balanced program that gives us long-term growth so that they're not having to take money that's desperate to themselves and their families and give it to someone else. I'm opposed to that, too.
Ms. Walters. And now it is time for our rebuttal for this period. Mr. President?
I think in education, when he lectured the country about the importance of discipline, I didn't like it at first, but I think it helped a little bit. But now we need both that kind of discipline and the resources and the consistent leadership that allows this country to catch up in education and science and training.
I think our future requires a President to lead us in an all-out search to advance our education, our learning, and our science and training, because this world is more complex and we're being pressed harder all the time.
We're going to continue to speak out in support of the other great change—the return to traditional values that was sparked in 1980. We're for prayer in the schools; we're against abortion. We support the return to basics. We'll continue, under our next Secretary of Education Bill Bennett, the policies that already have resulted in renewed excellence in education. We support the family and oppose anything that would take from it its power and its moral authority. We recognize that the family is the center of our society, and as the family goes, so goes civilization.
We'll continue to support the Job Training Partnership Act, which has a nearly two-thirds job placement rate. Credits in education and health care vouchers will help working families shop for services that they need.
In the area of education, we're returning to excellence, and again, the heroes are our people, not government. We're stressing basics of discipline, rigorous testing, and homework, while helping children become computer-smart as well. For 20 years scholastic aptitude test scores of our high school students went down, but now they have gone up 2 of the last 3 years. We must go forward in our commitment to the new basics, giving parents greater authority and making sure good teachers are rewarded for hard work and achievement through merit pay.
And speaking of the family, let's turn to a matter on the mind of every American parent tonight: education. We all know the sorry story of the sixties and seventies-soaring spending, plummeting test scores-and that hopeful trend of the eighties, when we replaced an obsession with dollars with a commitment to quality, and test scores started back up. There's a lesson here that we all should write on the blackboard a hundred times: In a child's education, money can never take the place of basics like discipline, hard work, and, yes, homework.
As a nation we do, of course, spend heavily on education—more than we spend on defense. Yet across our country, Governors like New Jersey's Tom Kean are giving classroom demonstrations that how we spend is as important as how much we spend. Opening up the teaching profession to all qualified candidates, merit pay—so that good teachers get A's as well as apples—and stronger curriculum, as Secretary Bennett has proposed for high schools—these imaginative reforms are making common sense the most popular new kid in America's schools. How can we help? Well, we can talk about and push for these reforms. But the most important thing we can do is to reaffirm that control of our schools belongs to the States, local communities and, most of all, to the parents and teachers.
The great legal debates of the past two decades over criminal justice have, at their root, been debates over a strict versus expansive construction of the Constitution. The Constitution, as originally intended by the framers, is itself tough on crime and protective of the victims of crime. For so long, the liberal message to our national culture was tune in, turn on, let it all hang out. And now they see conservatives taking the lead as our nation says no to drugs and yes to family and absolutely to schools that teach basic skills, basic values, and basic discipline. And it's no wonder that our nation admires a man who believes in teaching values in education and talks turkey to teachers, parents, and educators, such as our Secretary of Education, Bill Bennett.
But that isn't all that putting our principles to work has meant for this nation we love. It's meant judges on the Federal bench across our country who know that every criminal is not a victim of society and that equal justice means justice for the victims of crime. It's meant a Federal Government that knows that the true measure of quality in education is in a simple, yet profound question that our good friend [Secretary of Education] Bill Bennett asks over and over again, to the great consternation of the National Education Association. He asks, "What works?"
Well, it's meant an administration that is fighting for the rights of families, for the rights of parents to protect their children from the evils of drugs and pornography, and for the rights of the unborn. It's meant waging still other unfinished battles to put work into our welfare system, to make choice a part of our system of education, and to allow God back into our classrooms. He never should have been expelled in the first place.
But in education, we've helped spark a nationwide grassroots movement to return quality to our schools. State after State and school system after school system have introduced reforms, from merit pay for teachers to getting back to basics—the four R's: readin', writin', 'rithmetic, and respect for the teacher—and return an appreciation of fundamental values to America's classrooms. For as Teddy Roosevelt said, but too many seemed for too long to forget: "To educate a man in mind, but not in morals, is to create a menace to society."
A number of problems were discussed during the campaign and I see no reason to change the subject now. Campaign oratory on the issues of crime, pollution of air and water, conservation, welfare and expanded educational facilities does not mean the issues will go away because the campaign has ended. Problems remain to be solved and they challenge all of us. Government will lead, of course, but the answer must come from all you.
But this is not the ultimate answer. Only private industry in the last analysis can provide jobs with a future. Lieutenant Governor Robert Finch will be liaison between government and the private sector in an all-out program of job training and education leading to real employment.
On the subject of education ... hundreds of thousands of young men and women will receive an education in our state colleges and universities. We are proud of our ability to provide this opportunity for our youth and we believe it is no denial of academic freedom to provide this education within a framework of reasonable rules and regulations. Nor is it a violation of individual rights to require obedience to these rules and regulations or to insist that those unwilling to abide by them should get their education elsewhere.
Our educational level is higher. We have a higher percentage of professionals and skilled technicians, and more than double our share of scholars and scientists.
The President. I have not retreated from that at all. Yes. The process, however, that I have asked for is for both Secretary Bell of Education and Secretary Jim Edwards of Energy to reorganize, to produce the most effective streamlining of their Departments that they can—in Education, to look at the appropriate role of the Federal Government in education, if there is one, and to report back. And then we will decide, making our recommendations. Much the same thing holds true with the Department of Energy. The reason for this being that while they were new Cabinet-level agencies, they incorporated government functions and programs that had been going on in them, and they came under that umbrella. And we have to find out which of those functions that have been a Federal Government function continue and where they would best fit.
I'm trying to find out something about his boyhood, because we didn't live on the wrong side of the railroad tracks, but we lived so close to them we could hear the whistle real loud. And I know very much about the working group. I grew up in poverty and got what education I got all by myself and so forth, and I think it is sheer demagoguery to pretend that this economic program which we've submitted is not aimed at helping the great cross section of people in this country that have been burdened for too long by big government and high taxes. From 10 to 50 to 60 thousand dollars covers, certainly, all the middle class, and they pay 72 percent of the tax. And 73 percent of our tax relief or more is going to that bracket of workers. And we're going to do our utmost to keep that bottom rung of the ladder clear for those people that haven't yet started to climb.
Now, let me also emphasize that our efforts will not be confined to law enforcement. The problem of drug abuse is one that reaches deeply into American society. We need to mobilize our religious, educational, and fraternal groups in a national educational program against drug abuse.
Many of the social thinkers of the 1950's and '60's who discussed crime only in the context of disadvantaged childhoods and poverty-stricken neighborhoods were the same people who thought that massive government spending could wipe away our social ills. The underlying premise in both eases was a belief that there was nothing permanent or absolute about any man's nature, that he was a product of his material environment, and that by changing that environment—with government as the chief vehicle of change through educational, health, housing, and other programs—we could permanently change man and usher in a great new era.
I think we can see a parallel between the recent decline in our Nation's economy and its educational system. In each case, serious problems grew worse because of neglect, and because of misguided policies by people who viewed the world the way they wanted it to be, rather than the way it really is.
The first and most important of those principles is that education does not begin with Washington officials, or even State and local officials. It begins in the home, where it is the right and the responsibility of every parent. Our educational institutions—both public and private— exist to assist families in the instruction of their children. We sometimes forget this, and act as though things were the other way around.
A second principle, true in education just as in our economy, is that excellence demands competition. Competition among students and among schools. And why not? We must always meet our obligations to those who would fall behind without our assistance. But let's remember something else too: Without a race there can be no champion. No records broken, no excellence—in education or any other walk of life.
A third principle is diversity, which is absolutely essential to the American way of life. Nowhere is this more important than in education. Pluralism in American education has always been one of the strengths of our society and we welcome the recent resurgence of independent schools.
Finally, let me just say a word about a fourth kind of principle—the one that teaches us there really is a difference between right and wrong. I think it's time we took a good look at this moral side of contemporary schooling. How, for example, can we expect to restore educational excellence in schools still plagued by drug abuse and crime and chronic absenteeism?
In 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grant programs, costing $7 billion. When I took office, there were approximately 500, costing nearly a hundred billion dollars—13 programs for energy, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education. And here in the Congress, it takes at least 166 committees just to try to keep track of them.
In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. The total amount flowing into this fund will be $28 billion a year. Over the next 4 years the States can use this money in either of two ways. If they want to continue receiving Federal grants in such areas as transportation, education, and social services, they can use their trust fund money to pay for the grants. Or to the extent they choose to forgo the Federal grant programs, they can use their trust fund money on their own for those or other purposes. There will be a mandatory pass-through of part of these funds to local governments.
Let us go forward with our conviction that education doesn't begin with Washington officials or State officials or local officials. It begins with the family, where it is the right and the responsibility of every parent. And that responsibility, I think, includes teaching children respect for skin color that is different than their own; religious beliefs that are different from their own. It includes conveying the message to the young as well as to the old that racial discrimination and religious bigotry have no place in a free society.
We're cutting the size of the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
But I have come to speak with you today about other subjects of mutual concern-about the strength and the future of American families, about the education of their children, and about the increasing strains placed on both by current levels of taxation. I believe that working Americans are overtaxed and under appreciated, and I have come to Chicago to offer relief. I have come to propose further restoration of the incentives and the choices that were our inheritance and that encouraged our people to build the greatest nation on Earth.
In 1980, while campaigning, I promised to base this administration's policies on the primacy of parental rights and responsibility. I pledged to expand education opportunities by supporting a tuition tax credit plan that would permit parents to take a credit on their income tax for each child they have in private school. And today, as your President, I keep that pledge.
In 1979 a majority of all parents who had children in private elementary and secondary schools had incomes of $25,000 or less. Secondary school parents pay average tuition costs of $900, while also supporting their community public schools through local taxes. Our proposal is intended to relieve, as I've said before, that dual financial burden threatening to usurp the traditional right of parents to direct the education of their children.
Today, more than 5 million American youngsters attend thousands of religious and independent schools because of emphasis on values or the type of teaching available. Their parents have made that choice at great cost and sacrifice. They've made it because the education of their children is their greatest concern.
Senator Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said a few years ago— [applause] —I'11 tell him you responded to that— [laughter] —"It's time that we acknowledged the ordinary family's insistence on providing its children with the best obtainable education results in costs that the Federal Government should help it to bear—not by giving it a handout or a gift, but simply by allowing it to keep a bit more of the money it earns for itself." Well, I wholeheartedly agree, and I think most of you do as well.
It's no accident that we who are the freest people on Earth have an educational system unrivaled in the history of civilization. We know that knowledge and freedom are inseparable, and we also acknowledge the right of every individual to both. They cannot be arbitrarily apportioned according to race, station, or class.
Private education is no divisive threat to our system of education; it is an important part of it. Our public schools offer quality education to our children and are the heart of our communities. We must ensure that their classrooms continue to provide the finest education possible. But alternatives to public education tend to strengthen public education. Taken together, public and private institutions sustain the diversity that has made our culture rich.
Excellence demands competition among students and among schools. And why not? We must always meet our obligation to those who would fall behind without our assistance. But let's remember, without a race there can be no champion, no records broken, no excellence—in education or any other walk of life.
This freedom to choose what type of education is best for each child has contributed much to America's reputation for excellence in education. Unfortunately, the high plane of literacy and the diversity of education we have achieved is threatened by policymakers who seem to prefer uniform mediocrity to the rich variety that has been our heritage.
Our leaders must remember that education doesn't begin with some isolated bureaucrat in Washington. It doesn't even begin with State or local officials. Education begins in the home, where it's a parental right and responsibility. Both our public and our private schools exist to aid our families in the instruction of our children, and it's time some people back in Washington stopped acting as if family wishes were only getting in the way.
This city of Chicago is a good example of the strength that pluralism and freedom of choice have provided our people. Chicago has long been a magnet for immigrants who have come to this country to make a better life. For them, education was not simply another part of American society—it was the key that opened the golden door. It was the best path to progress for their families. And it's been an indispensable part of the growth of our nation and the prosperity of all our people.
Such statistics explain why Americans at every economic level believe education is still something to sacrifice for. It still offers the promise of a better life. It's still the hope of our people.
Well, those Americans have not forgotten what education and freedom can do. They know that freedom is the only truly essential possession we have, and education is freedom's guide. These are not easy times for a great many Americans, but the future looks dark only for those who've lost faith in our people and in the promise of individuals who are educated and free. The rest of us should welcome the future, knowing that with God's help it is ours to shape.
Together with your colleagues in other independent and public schools, you are molding each rising generation. You're working with parents to fill young minds with the knowledge and young hearts with the morality, the understanding and compassion that they will need to live in happiness and fulfillment. In the meantime, we in Washington must make sure that freedom, the other half of education, is still secure when your students graduate.
We must make sure that the incentives to use their education are not destroyed by an oppressive taxation. We must be sure the Federal Government doesn't soak up the lion's share of our gross national product, that regulations don't choke off technology, and that interest rates don't ruin the dream of self-employment.
—In all, Federal programs will provide over $12 billion to education aid to students. And this amount will provide for 7 million grants and loans, giving assistance to almost half of all the students in the country who will enroll in college during the next school year.
Years ago, the Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, Horace Mann, said education "beyond all other devices of human origin is a great equalizer of the conditions of men—the balance wheel of the social machinery."
The immigrants who came to Chicago, the poor in our inner cities, the middle classes struggling to make ends meet—these Americans still believe the American dream. They still yearn for prosperity and still sacrifice so that their children will enjoy it. They mark progress by the level of education reached by members of their families. Parents who never finished high school send their children to college. Each generation stands upon the shoulders of the one before as our nation and our people reach for the stars.
We must keep those dreams alive. We must provide the learning, shape the understanding, and encourage the spirit each generation will need to discover, to create, and to improve the lot of man. But we must also preserve the freedom they will need both to pursue that education and to use it.
The President. Well, this will not allow any government interference in any way in education, because the aid is going directly to the parents of children who are going to the schools. So, this will not lead to any government direction or interference in any way in education, if that was the meaning of your question.
The President. Support Catholic education of schools? No, this is ruled to be the separation of church and state that they can't do that, but this is why we're proposing a program that we think will help, by getting the aid through the tax credits directly to the parents and that this will help solve the problem.
The President. Well, Mr. Adams,1 to the teachers here at this school, and to all of you students, I can't quite describe what a pleasure this is for us. We're here because we heard about this school. We heard what beginning with one man to save a school has developed into an educational institution of which you all must be very proud, because there aren't too many educational institutions in the country that can match your record. And we had to see this for ourselves—not just to see it for ourselves but also because we hope that we can spread the word.
And maybe I can illustrate what I'm trying to say was when I was Governor of California, every year they used to bring to the capital a group of students who'd come from other countries and who, on an exchange-student basis, would spend a year in our schools, usually in high school. And every year I had the same question for them. I would say, "Tell me"—these students from all over, Europe and every place else—I'd say, "Tell me, how do our schools compare? Are they tougher than yours? Is the work harder?" And then I'd have to wait until they stopped laughing. That was their assessment of the difference, and I'm talking about schools that weren't like yours. I wish we could get some of them in here. I don't think they'd laugh, because I think they'd find out that you met the same educational levels they do.
The President. Bless you, and I'm glad you asked that question about the college loans and so forth and the educational help. Much has been made of this, and it's been badly distorted in the reporting.
I was under the impression—and maybe I was wrong—I didn't know there were any court cases pending—but I was under the impression that the problem of segregated schools had been settled, that we have desegregation. But I was getting complaints-and even before I got here as President, I was getting complaints that some of the Internal Revenue agents, the tax collectors that collect the income tax, were harassing some schools, even though they were desegregated—but harassing them and threatening them with taking away their tax exemption-which educational institutions have-if they didn't oh, set up scholarship programs or go out actively recruiting and take steps to try and increase their efforts at desegregation. And I didn't think that this was the place of Treasury agents to be doing this. So, I told the Secretary at Treasury that I didn't think that. I think as individuals we get harassed enough by the Internal Revenue collectors. And I didn't know that there were a couple of legal cases pending.
You must be aware that there are millions and millions of parents all over this country terribly dissatisfied with the education their children are getting in schools—the lack of discipline and everything else. And with that deterioration in so much of education you are such a shining light that, as I said in the beginning, I want to spread the word. This is the way it should be done. You're doing it.
Having mentioned education, may I digress for a moment. Recently a national convention having to do with education was held in California. A central theme at that gathering was an attack on our efforts to get control of runaway Federal spending and what a threat that was to education. They painted some pretty horrendous pictures—horrendous but untrue.
I have charged that the Federal Government in recent years has interfered unnecessarily in the classroom, claiming its right to do that by virtue of Federal financial aid to public schools. Well, that aid amounts to only 8.1 percent of the total cost of public school education. Local and State government put up the other 91.9 percent.
Yes, there will be savings, but not because we're depriving children of necessary educational programs. Many of the savings will be in the elimination of Federal administrative overhead and in giving local authorities more flexibility, free of useless regulations and red tape. And that, incidentally, is the underlying principle of federalism.
That's why we support and endorse a program of tuition tax credits, so that our independent schools and our country as a whole will prosper. We need diversity and excellence. As economist Thomas Sowell has suggested, these tuition tax credits are especially important "to those who are mentioned the least: the poor and the working class." As the cost of education has skyrocketed, it is these groups that have been particularly hard hit by the double burden of supporting private and public schools.
And let me add here that far from being a threat to the public school system, these tax credits will serve only to raise the standards of the competing school systems. As a New York Times editorial pointed out recently, the mere threat of tax credits "served to jolt public education out of its lethargy. In New York and other places, public schools now show encouraging signs of improvement."
In addition to the enforcement element, our strategy will also focus on international cooperation, education, and prevention-which Nancy's very interested in—detoxification and treatment and research.
We Americans are still the technological leaders in most fields. We must keep that edge, and to do so we need to begin renewing the basics—starting with our educational system. While we grew complacent, others have acted. Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours, graduates from its universities more engineers than we do. If a child doesn't receive adequate math and science teaching by the age of 16, he or she has lost the chance to be a scientist or an engineer. We must join together-parents, teachers, grass roots groups, organized labor, and the business community-to revitalize American education by setting a standard of excellence.
In 1983 we seek four major education goals: a quality education initiative to encourage a substantial upgrading of math and science instruction through block grants to the States; establishment of education savings accounts that will give middle and lower-income families an incentive to save for their children's college education and, at the same time, encourage a real increase in savings for economic growth; passage of tuition tax credits for parents who want to send their children to private or religiously affiliated schools; a constitutional amendment to permit voluntary school prayer. God should never have been expelled from America's classrooms in the first place.
Over the past year, our Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives has successfully forged a working partnership involving leaders of business, labor, education, and government to address the training needs of American workers. Thanks to the Task Force, private sector initiatives are now underway in all 50 States of the Union, and thousands of working people have been helped in making the shift from dead-end jobs and low-demand skills to the growth areas of high technology and the service economy. Additionally, a major effort will be focused on encouraging the expansion of private community child care. The new advisory council on private sector initiatives will carry on and extend this vital work of encouraging private initiative in 1983.
You know, we were frustrated on two other fronts last year. There are 5 million American children attending private schools today because of emphasis on religious values and educational standards. Their families, most of whom earn less than $25,000 a year, pay private tuition, and they also pay their full share of taxes to fund the public schools. We think they're entitled to relief. So, I want you to know that shortly, we'll be sending legislation back up to the Hill, and we will begin the struggle all over again to secure tuition tax credits for deserving families.
That's what's happening with CBN and the 700 Club's "Operation Blessing." They've given nearly $2 1/2 million to more than 8,500 churches, and this money is then matched by the local churches. The result has been fantastic: More than 100,000 needy families helped, either through direct or in-kind contributions, ranging from food and clothing to education, dental care, and housework,
On another front, all of you know how vitally important it is for us to reverse the decline in American education, to take responsibility for the education of our children out of the hands of the bureaucrats and put it back in the hands of parents and teachers. That's why the Congress must stop dithering. We need those tuition tax credits. We need a voucher system for the parents of disadvantaged children. We need education savings accounts, a sort of IRA for college. And finally—and don't think for a moment I've given up—we need to eliminate that unnecessary and politically engendered Department of Education.
But whether it's cutting spending and taxing, shrinking the size of the deficit, ending overregulation, inefficiency, fraud, and waste in government, cracking down on career criminals, revitalizing American education, pressing for prayer and abortion legislation, I think you can see that the agenda we've put before America these past 2 years has been a conservative one. Oh, and there are two other matters that I think you'd be interested in. First, as part of our federalism effort, next week we will be sending to the Congress our proposal for four megablock grants that will return vital prerogatives to the States where they belong. And second, the Office of Management and Budget will press ahead with new regulations prohibiting the use of Federal tax dollars for purposes of political advocacy.
But here's what we've done at the Federal Government level. It isn't a case of cutting back the aid. But we found out that the programs had expanded to the point that people, families with incomes enough that they should be able to provide the education themselves for their children, were still getting this government aid and the government guaranteed loans and so forth. We changed the standards to make it possible to give more of that aid to those whose financial standing or earnings were such that they couldn't go without it.
Government has done a lot of things now and in its aid to education and all that has, in effect, kind of moved to take some of what should be parental duties away from the parents now and have you beholden to government. And I just don't think—government can be a lot of things, but it can't be mama and papa and it shouldn't try.
The participants in the session were part of the Close-Up Foundation program, a nonpartisan educational foundation providing secondary school students the opportunity to study the American political system.
This past year alone, American hunters have paid more than $107 million toward these conservation efforts. The money will fund important studies of game and their habitat. It'll provide food and habitat projects for wildlife. And portions will go for hunter safety and education courses where our youngsters will be taught marksmanship, firearms safety, and some of the values and ethics of hunting and the outdoors. I deeply appreciate your contributions to preserving our national treasures for the benefit of our people and future generations.
The President. Not really, because, you see, education is not the prime responsibility of the Federal Government, and the total budget for education in the United States is far greater than the defense budget. As a matter of fact, the Federal Government actually provides less than 10 percent of the cost of education through the Department of Education.
Now, we've gone through a period of a number of years, about 10 years, in which we went from $760 million Federal aid to education to about $14.9 billion, and that's a 2,000-percent increase. And it was during that period that the testing scores—the college testing, entrance tests, and so forth-began to decline so severely.
Now, I appointed a Commission to study and bring back a report on what we felt was a decline in education in our schools. They brought back a masterful report. And in that report there's very little suggestion for more money. What they're talking about can be corrected without money. It takes some leadership. It takes some return to basics. It takes having students that now have to learn what they're supposed to learn in a class before they're moved on to the next class, just because they've come to the end of the year. And there's an awful lot of that goes on.
We think there's some common sense that is needed. And so we've proven that money, throwing money at it isn't the answer. And the Federal Government can never match the funding of schools at the local and State level, where we've created the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and then have let it deteriorate. And I think you can make a case that it began to deteriorate when the Federal Government started interfering in education.
The President. Well, I don't know that so many of those things—there would be some increase in money there, I'm quite sure. But again, how much is being wasted on some things that aren't contributing to their education that could be transferred to that? And I think that—well, right now there are three—Time magazine, just a few days ago, had an article in there about three inner-city high schools: one in the Bronx, New York, one in Los Angeles, one in Austin, Texas. And just by changes from the principal's office down, in leadership, these schools have become what schools are supposed to be, to the extent that students are leaving private schools to transfer to these public schools.
And I want to implement as completely as possible that plan that was submitted to us by this Commission that was investigating education. And it won't cost $11 billion, which a nameless gentleman has suggested he would advocate that we spend. [Laughter]
Mr. President, it is my sense that the people of EPA who have stayed with it from the beginning are there because of their belief in the fundamental importance of their mission. EPA was not created to deal with the usual mix of social problems, whether they be poverty, jobs, housing, education, crime. In a real sense, EPA's mission transcends all of these. That mission is the preservation of life itself. The career people of EPA recognize better than the rest of us the necessity of harmonizing their mission with the essentials of the life they're trying to preserve. They know the single-minded pursuit of any social goal to the exclusion of all others can cause severe societal distortions. They are willing and uniquely able to help our country avoid those distortions if so charged.
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
Through the years, this promise was made real, thanks to the hard work, the dedication, and commitment to freedom of the American people. Our commitment to freedom has meant commitment to the rule of law, and commitment to the law has created opportunity: for example, historic legislation like the Homestead Act; passage of the 14th amendment to strengthen the guarantee of civil rights for every citizen, regardless of race, creed, or color; and, more recently, Brown vs. Board of Education, which emphatically decreed that race can never be used to deny any person equal educational opportunity. No future will outshine ours if we hold tight to the torch of freedom, if we remain true to the rule of law, and if we meet the challenge of providing opportunity to all our people.
And maybe we should be reminded that these gentlemen up here, holders of the Congressional Medal of Honor, it is given for service above and beyond the call of duty. But you know better than most that Hispanic Americans have not always been remembered for their service or valor, have not always been treated with the dignity, respect, and fairness they deserve. This was particularly true at the end of World War II, when those who had fought for their country returned home to confront discrimination in education, health care, housing, employment, and other areas. But true to your tradition, you responded with character and courage.
And we're moving in another area: to end the politicizing of education, bring excellence back to our schools, better opportunity for our schoolchildren, including effective bilingual programs so important for Hispanic children. And I hope you'll join me in persuading the Congress to accede to the overwhelming desire of the American people for a constitutional amendment permitting prayer in our schools.
The prime interest rate has been cut nearly in half, so costs of business, mortgage, education, and car loans have dropped. The Federal income tax on a typical working family is $700 less than if our tax program had not been passed. With parents, students, entrepreneurs, workers, and consumers feeling more secure, opportunities for jobs are expanding. Our work force in September rose by nearly 400,000 to 101.9 million—the highest level in American history. And the trend will continue.
Looking beyond the economy, we see more evidence that the quality of life is improving. Life expectancy reached a record high last year, climbing to 74.5 years. Infant mortality declined to an all-time low with only 11.2 deaths per 1,000 live births. And the number of divorces dropped for the first time since 1962. Serious crime dropped 3 percent, the first measurable decline since 1977. Quality education, an American tradition—but one neglected for years—will be restored, thanks to leadership in Washington and vigorous action by your families at the grassroots.
Good things are happening in America. Confidence is returning. Our quality of life is improving because your voices, voices of common sense, are finally getting through. Believe me, it wasn't Washington experts who said government is too big, taxes are too high, criminals are coddled, education's basics are neglected, and values of family and faith are being undermined. That was your message; you made reforms possible.
Governor Atiyeh. You're welcome. We thought it was kind of nice ourselves as Governors. Picking up on the theme of your interest in education, here again we recognize, as Governors, how important that is within our own States as well as nationally, and some sense the frustration that Congress hasn't acted on your crime control package, and we urge them to move forward on that issue.
I'm particularly pleased also with your resolution on education. The initiative for raising standards and improving education generally has got to come from you and from the State level and the local communities, and I applaud your leadership.
You might be interested to know that I'm meeting with Members of Congress today on tuition tax credits. Getting that passed is an important step that we can take at the Federal level to improve education policy for the Nation.
Today American children need good education more than ever. But we can't get learning back into our schools until we get the crime and violence out. It's not a question of anyone asking for a police state. It's just that, as Albert Shanker of the American Federation of Teachers put it, "We're not going to get people interested in English or mathematics or social studies and languages, unless we solve discipline problems and take out of our schools those students who prevent teachers from teaching."
So, please, if you have discipline problems at your school, find out what you can do to help. By working together we can restore good order to America's classrooms and give our sons and daughters the education they deserve.
And at the same time that we've moved ahead on the economy, we've moved against waste and fraud in the Federal Government, saving billions of dollars. We've taken aim at crime, increasing drug-related arrests, more than doubling organized crime convictions, and setting up drug task forces across the country. And we've moved education to the very top of the national agenda. When we took office, only a handful of States had task forces on education. Today that number is 50.
Families stand at the center of our society. And every family has a personal stake in promoting excellence in education. Excellence does not begin in Washington. A 600-percent increase in Federal spending on education between 1960 and 1980 was accompanied by a steady decline in Scholastic Aptitude Test scores. Excellence must begin in our homes and neighborhood schools, where it's the responsibility of every parent and teacher and the right of every child.
Our children come first, and that's why I established a bipartisan National Commission on Excellence in Education, to help us chart a commonsense course for better education. And already, communities are implementing the Commission's recommendations. Schools are reporting progress in math and reading skills. But we must do more to restore discipline to schools; and we must encourage the teaching of new basics, reward teachers of merit, enforce tougher standards, and put our parents back in charge.
I will continue to press for tuition tax credits to expand opportunities for families and to soften the double payment for those paying public school taxes and private school tuition. Our proposal would target assistance to low- and middle-income families. Just as more incentives are needed within our schools, greater competition is needed among our schools. Without standards and competition, there can be no champions, no records broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.
Economic recovery, better education, rededication to values, all show the spirit of renewal gaining the upper hand. And all will improve family life in the eighties. But families need more. They need assurance that they and their loved ones can walk the streets of America without being afraid. Parents need to know their children will not be victims of child pornography and abduction. This year we will intensify our drive against these and other horrible crimes like sexual abuse and family violence.
During the last decade, we've seen people's commitment to religious liberty expressed by the establishment of thousands of new religious schools. These schools were built by the sacrifices of parents determined to provide a quality education for their children in an environment that permits traditional values to flourish.
Now I believe that some of you met with my advisers to discuss the situation of religious schools in Nebraska. We have all seen news accounts of the jailing of a minister, the padlocking of a church, and the continuing imprisonment of fathers of students. This issue of religious liberty has arisen in other States. The question is how to find the balance between assuring quality of education and preserving freedom for churches and parents who want their schools to reflect their faith.
Just as our schools were in decline during the bad days, today they're playing their part in the national renewal. Since our administration put education at the top of the American agenda we've seen a grassroots revolution that promises to strengthen every school in the country. From Maine to California, parents, teachers, school administrators, State and local officeholders, and principals like you have begun vital work to improve the fundamentals—not fancy budget structures, not frills in the curriculum, but basic teaching and learning. In the words of Secretary Bell, "There is currently in progress the greatest, most far-reaching, most promising reform and renewal of education we have seen since the turn of the century."
When our administration took office only a handful of States had task forces on education. Today they all do. In addition, 44 States are increasing graduation requirements, 42 are studying improvements in teacher certification, and 13 are establishing master teacher programs. With school reform, as with so many other challenges again and again in our nation's history, the American people are showing it can be done.
Now, some insist there's only one reform that would make any real difference—more money. But that's been tried. Total expenditures in our nation's schools this year, according to the National Center for Educational Statistics, will total $230 billion. That's up almost 7 percent from last year, about double the rate of inflation, and more than double what we spent on education just 10 years ago.
So, if money alone were the answer the problem would have been shrinking, not growing. And those who constantly call for more money are the same people who presided over two decades of unbroken education decline.
James Coleman, a top education expert, argues in his recent book, "High School Achievement," that we need to focus on the factors that truly matter. He states, "Characteristics of schools [that] are related to achievement can be divided into two areas: academic demands and discipline."
We must also expect our students to learn the basics. Too many are allowed to abandon vocational and college prep courses for general ones, so when they graduate, they're prepared for neither work nor higher education. Stories abound of students who leave school unable to read and write at an adult level. In 1980, 35 States required only 1 year of math for a high school diploma; 36 required only 1 year of science.
Now, the Federal Government can support these reforms and do so without recycling still more tax dollars or imposing still more regulations. And our administration is doing just that. We're working to restore our nation's parents, State and local officials, teachers, school administrators, and principals to their rightful place in the educational process.
Our administration has replaced 29 narrow categorical education programs with one broad block grant to give State and local officials greater freedom. And in the budget I submitted to Congress last week I called for that grant to be increased by $250 million. We've instituted major regulatory reforms to dig educators out from under mountains of red tape. And because parents should have the right to choose the schools they know are best for their children, we've proposed education vouchers and tuition tax credits—concepts the American people support overwhelmingly.
In October 1 signed a proclamation that named this school year the National Year of Partnerships in Education. The proclamation urged businesses, labor unions, and other groups of working people to form partnerships with schools in their communities. Since then, partnerships in education have increased around the country dramatically. And in December, I announced a new program to recognize outstanding students-the President's Academic Fitness Awards.
Despite the importance of these initiatives at the national level, the main responsibility for education rests with our States and communities, and they're moving ahead. State by State, the success stories are mounting.
As principals you have an enormous responsibility. Perhaps more than any other Americans, you hold our nation's future in your hands. I know that you're determined to go on with the great work of making certain our schools give our sons and daughters the quality education they deserve. And I'm convinced that with your help America's future will be bright beyond our dreams.
Thank you, and God bless you all.
The National Exchange Club started the movement 37 years ago. And today its nearly 1,300 service clubs nationwide are working hard to promote crime preventive activities. The American Association of Retired Persons is helping the elderly. The
National Crime Prevention Council and its spokesdog, McGruff, are leading a nationwide anticrime education program. The National Sheriffs Association has a key role in the Neighborhood Watch program.
Building an opportunity society also means providing our children the best possible education. And here, too, we're the ones with courage to call for basic reforms. Overall spending on education soared by 600 percent over two decades, but the test scores—the SAT scores—went down, down, down. So, what do our critics want? More money for more programs. What America's schools really need are tougher standards, more homework, more discipline, merit pay for teachers, and our parents finally in charge.
We've improved State and local cooperation through local law enforcement coordinating committees and the Justice Department's Governors Project. We've added prison space and improved training opportunities for local and State police. We've brought the FBI in on major drug cases. Our 12 new regional drug task forces are bringing in the big cases against major drug traffickers. And we've stepped up our educational efforts so we can take potential drug customers away from the dealers, because just reducing the supply of drugs isn't good enough. We can't solve the problem until we turn off the customers.
And can they explain why they're so bitterly opposed to tuition tax credits and why they think it's fair for one parochial or private school parents to be forced to pay twice for their children's education?
Strengthening values also demands a national commitment to excellence in education. If we are to pioneer a revolution in technology, meet challenges of the space age, and preserve values of courage, responsibility, integrity, and love, then we can't afford a generation of children hooked on cocaine and unable to read or write. Conservatives have pointed out for years that while Federal spending on education was soaring, aptitude scores were going steadily down. Look at the case of New Hampshire. It ranks dead last in State spending on education, but its students have the highest SAT scores among those States where at least half the students take the test. And they've maintained that honor for more than 10 years. America's schools don't need new spending programs; they need tougher standards, more homework, merit pay for teachers, discipline, and parents back in charge.
The President. I have not retreated from that at all. Yes. The process, however, that I have asked for is for both Secretary Bell of Education and Secretary Jim Edwards of Energy to reorganize, to produce the most effective streamlining of their Departments that they can—in Education, to look at the appropriate role of the Federal Government in education, if there is one, and to report back. And then we will decide, making our recommendations. Much the same thing holds true with the Department of Energy. The reason for this being that while they were new Cabinet-level agencies, they incorporated government functions and programs that had been going on in them, and they came under that umbrella. And we have to find out which of those functions that have been a Federal Government function continue and where they would best fit.
Now, already some have protested that there must be no reduction in aid to schools. Well, let me point out that Federal aid to education amounts to only 8 percent of the total educational funding, and for this 8 percent, the Federal Government has insisted on tremendously disproportionate share of control over our schools. Whatever reductions we've proposed in that 8 percent will amount to very little in the total cost of education. They will, however, restore more authority to States and local school districts.
We've also begun taking action on particularly controversial rules. For example, rules mandating extensive bilingual education programs, passive restraints in large cars, the unnecessary labeling of chemicals in the workplace, controls on garbage truck noise, and increased overtime payments for executives have been withdrawn or postponed. These actions alone are expected to save the American public and industry almost $1 billion annually.
Now, bilingual education—there is a need, but there is also a purpose that has been distorted, again at the Federal level. Where there are predominantly students speaking a foreign language at home, coming to school and being taught in English, and they fall behind or are unable to keep up in some subjects because of the lack of knowledge of the language, I think it is proper that we have teachers equipped who can get at them in their own language and understand why it is they don't get the answer to the problem and help them in that way. But it is absolutely wrong and against the American concept to have a bilingual education program that is now openly, admittedly dedicated to preserving their native language and never getting them adequate in English so they can go out into the job market and participate. [Applause] Thank you.
Nancy and I consider it a great pleasure to be here today to congratulate you who have successfully completed your education and training at the United States Military Academy. I'm a little self-conscious being introduced as your Commander when I began my military career as a second lieutenant in the Cavalry, the horse Cavalry, that is. [Laughter] I have threatened on occasion that that was the reason I got this job was so that I could reinstitute the horse Cavalry. [Laughter]
Already enlistments are up, and so are reenlistments. And surprisingly—well, maybe we shouldn't be surprised—many who have already left the service are now returning. There's also been a decided rise in quality as measured by educational and testing attainment. Something other than pay and benefits contributed to this.
I'm trying to find out something about his boyhood, because we didn't live on the wrong side of the railroad tracks, but we lived so close to them we could hear the whistle real loud. And I know very much about the working group. I grew up in poverty and got what education I got all by myself and so forth, and I think it is sheer demagoguery to pretend that this economic program which we've submitted is not aimed at helping the great cross section of people in this country that have been burdened for too long by big government and high taxes. From 10 to 50 to 60 thousand dollars covers, certainly, all the middle class, and they pay 72 percent of the tax. And 73 percent of our tax relief or more is going to that bracket of workers. And we're going to do our utmost to keep that bottom rung of the ladder clear for those people that haven't yet started to climb.
Now, one last thing. I know there's been a lot of concern about the volunteer military and would it work or were we going to have to resort to a draft. And as you all know, I've been campaigning up and down the country that I'm opposed to a peacetime draft. We never had had one until the years following World War II. And we've taken some steps. We've taken some steps for a realistic pay scale that we want for the men in the military. And I'm happy to tell you tonight that the enlistments are up, higher than they've ever been. The educational and quality level of the men enlisting is higher than it has ever been. The percentile of the lowest in education that we take in the military is the lowest that it has ever been.
"He has examined the options, as I suggested, and the choices he's made are taking him far away from me. He believes there are opportunities for him in education, travel, and experience. No doubt there are. There's a stack of thirsty terry towels I bought for a college basketball player. He left them here. He left the shampoo and soap and cords and sweaters, too. He won't need those things. His country will now provide for all his needs. He thinks he's getting a good deal. No doubt he is. Personally, I'm inclined to believe the country is getting the good deal. In exchange for all their provisions, they are getting one tall, tanned fellow with summer bleached hair, a sharp young mind, more potential and possibility than I have the space here to describe.
Our interest payments on the debt alone are now running more than $96 billion a year. That's more than the total combined profits last year of the 500 biggest companies in the country; or, to put it another way, Washington spends more on interest than on all of its education, nutrition, and medical programs combined.
Similarly, education is the principal responsibility of local school systems, teachers, parents, citizen boards, and State governments. By eliminating the Department of Education less than 2 years after it was created, we cannot only reduce the budget but ensure that local needs and preferences, rather than the wishes of Washington, determine the education of our children.
Specifically, we've encouraged policies which reduce or eliminate subsidies to food consumers and provide adequate and stable price incentives to their agricultural sectors to increase production. We'll emphasize education and innovative joint research and development activities throughout the United States and developing countries' institutions. We will also encourage rural credit, improved storage and distribution facilities, and roads to facilitate marketing.
And this isn't original with me. This was first suggested when the first proposal for Federal aid to education was made. Norris Cotton, then Senator from New Hampshire, looking at the amount of money that was suggested—and the Federal Government was protesting that it meant no interference; just wanted to help by giving money—and he said, "Well, if that's really true," he said, "why don't we turn the tobacco tax over to the States and the only restriction is that it be used for education?" And you know how they defeated him? They said, "Well, it wouldn't be right to educate our children with a sin tax." So the Federal Government got its foot in the door and went on from there. That's all we want to stop or change.
But I would think that first of all, education-we built the greatest school system the world has ever seen and built it at the local level and the local school district level. And then the Federal Government got into the school business only by having preempted so much of the tax resources, and those tax resources that grew with the economy faster than something like the property tax, which is the principal basis for educational funding. Then they got into it through that money thing, having preempted the money, created the problem, and then they said, "Well, now we want to help you." But in return for the help, they wanted to also regulate, and have interfered to a large extent.
I would think that this would include such things as welfare; certainly, it would include education. And then with this, under this federalism, review again what legitimately and honestly belongs at the Federal level and at the local level in the system of taxes.
I am opposed with every fiber of my being to discrimination, and to have set in law the fact that tax exemptions could be denied to schools that—and educational institutions that practiced discrimination. Now, as I say, it probably wasn't handled as well as it could, because, it being in our minds a procedural matter—and in my mind, certainly—we didn't anticipate that it was going to be as misinterpreted as it was. And what we have accomplished with what we did was we've prevented the IRS from determining national social policy all by itself. It'll now be by elected officials, the Congress.
I have already explained myself with regard to the discrimination in education, and I think that my record will stand for itself, if anyone wants to look at it, that I have been on the side of opposition to bigotry and discrimination and prejudice—and long before it ever became a kind of national issue under the title of civil rights. And my life has been spent on that side.
The President. No, I don't believe so. All we're doing is what every administration before us has done and we hadn't been doing. It's simply a case so that we all know what is going on. And, also, we've seen the situation when it would have been very, I think, educational for the people and advantageous for us if two or three particular issues could have been brought before the public; and because of not checking with each other, we found three separate departments all going at once with their statements.
Now, there are a number of programs that are going forward. For example, in five States, started by the governments—which ought to restore some people's faith that our turning back of things to the State governments is not—in these five States they have started programs, not statewide, but in several important, key cities as an experiment-and a very successful one so far—in which the private sector is involved in taking the least-likely-to-succeed seniors in high school into job-training programs. They don't go for the best—they don't, those they figure—but they found some actual statistics of the percentage of high school students that were—you could really conceive that they were going to have trouble when they got out and they probably were not going to go on to any additional education in college or anything. And 60 percent of them wind up within 2 years on welfare. So, they started this experiment, and it has been, I think it's something like up in the 90 percent of salvage of these students who were judged by their associates and their teachers and so forth to be the least likely to make it.
In 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grant programs, costing $7 billion. When I took office, there were approximately 500, costing nearly a hundred billion dollars—13 programs for energy, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education. And here in the Congress, it takes at least 166 committees just to try to keep track of them.
In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. The total amount flowing into this fund will be $28 billion a year. Over the next 4 years the States can use this money in either of two ways. If they want to continue receiving Federal grants in such areas as transportation, education, and social services, they can use their trust fund money to pay for the grants. Or to the extent they choose to forgo the Federal grant programs, they can use their trust fund money on their own for those or other purposes. There will be a mandatory pass-through of part of these funds to local governments.
America's needs today are too great for one partner to solve alone. As I pointed out in the State of the Union address, in 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grants costing $7 billion. When I took office there were approximately 500 such grants, costing nearly $100 billion—13 programs for energy conservation, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education—and in the Congress it takes at least 166 committees just to try and keep track of them. They try to keep track of them, but Federal grants are like rabbits—they multiply like crazy, and when they're out you can't catch them. [Laughter]
The other aspect of the plan is a turnback of responsibilities to the States for over 40 Federal programs in education, community development, transportation, and social services—along with the resources to pay for them. In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. By 1988 the States will be in complete control of these grant programs.
We're cutting the size of the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
As chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, he played an instrumental role in enacting last year's budget cuts. They were, incidentally, the biggest cuts that have ever been made in the history of this country. And let me say he handled those budget cuts with as much skill and precision as he flew the spacecraft that took him to the Moon. He was careful, and he did no harm to the programs that genuinely serve the needy or provided sound education value to our children.
You know, right now, because of some changes that we're making with regard to the Department of Education, there seems to be spreading in a kind of a wave among some people that—well, we're trying to do away with or lower educational quality. Not so. There are those in Washington who, ever since they turned to Federal aid to education, intended Federal control of education, and that interference by the Federal Government has hurt the quality of education from coast to coast in this country.
Come to Alabama and see how concern for education and commitment to equal opportunity, including a war on illiteracy, consumes almost two-thirds of State spending and ranks Alabama fifth in the Nation in spending on elementary and secondary education.
Well, as you probably know, our plan to restore the proper State-Federal balance has two major components. Starting in fiscal 1984, the Federal Government will assume full responsibility for the cost of the rapidly growing Medicaid program, in exchange for the States picking up Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps. Now, the other aspect of the plan is a turnback of responsibilities to the States for over 40 Federal programs in education, community development, transportation, and social services—along with the resources to pay for them. In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the States. By 1988 the States will be in full control of these grant programs.
We've proposed the broad outlines of a plan to restore accountability to government. It includes the transfer to our States of more than 40 Federal programs in the areas of education, transportation, community development, and social services. And we want to send back to you the tax sources to pay for them as well. The centerpiece of the proposal is the almost dollar-for-dollar swap of two of the largest areas of welfare. The Federal Government would take over Medicaid in exchange for State assumption of Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps,
The battle against discrimination still goes on, and much remains to be done. But in a single generation, an entire nation recommitted itself to the cause of equal rights and used the full force of the law to ban once and for all racial bias in public education, in hiring, and in the voting booth.
I wasn't exactly properly dressed for the occasion, but I couldn't resist getting in line and joining them for the little time I was there. Now, a roster of their names would probably reveal a variety of ethnic backgrounds. As would be true of any group of Americans, they included different races and religions, I know—but who asked? And the line was coeducational—girls and boys. Looking at their fresh, wholesome and, yes, happy, enthusiastic faces, even though they'd been there since early morning, I was looking at the future of America and, believe me, the future looked mighty good.
—Nearly 7 million separate loans or awards will be available for students in higher education through Federal assistance programs. Since the college-level population numbers only slightly more than 11 million, that means that better than one out of every two students has the opportunity for assistance. The 1983 budget provides more than $12 billion in total tuition support, nearly three times the level available just as recently as 1977.
For all the media talk about fairness, you might not have heard that our 1983 budget will spend nearly three times as much for tuition support for higher education than was available in 1977. Better than one out of every two students will be eligible for assistance. Through Medicaid and Medicare, the Federal Government will pay for the medical care of 99 percent of those Americans over the age 65. Twenty-eight percent of all Federal spending will go to the elderly-an average of $7,850 per senior citizen in payments and services. The Federal Government will still subsidize approximately 95 million meals per day—14 percent of all the meals served. And about $2.8 billion will be spent on job training and employment.
George Bush's wife, Barbara, told me of a church that she visited in Atlanta, St. Luke's Episcopal Church. In the early seventies this church was in decline. It was losing membership and attendance. And then a few members realized that you only gain your life by giving it away. So, some of them started a food program. At first, it was just sandwiches at lunch for the needy of the neighborhood. Now it runs 7 days a week and serves up to 600 people a day. The church has also opened a building to an educational program for high school dropouts, which is jointly run by a nonprofit organization, the local school system, and members of the community. The church, incidentally, has grown tremendously in membership.
Now, Bill and I aren't asking you to take over the social welfare system. We're just asking that you give generously of your time, your know-how, and your imagination to help Americans help themselves. Many of you already do. When we say Chamber of Commerce, what comes to mind?—community leadership in economic development, job creation, education, medical care and special assistance to the elderly, the disabled, and the blind. American business does care and is involved. Just keep doing what you do best, and ask more of those around you to pitch in and help.
The Class of '32 has no yearbook to record our final days on the campus. The Class of '33 didn't put out a Prism because of the hardships of that Great Depression era. The faculty sometimes went for months on end without pay. And yet this school made it possible for young men and women, myself included, to get an education even though we were totally without funds, our families destitute victims of the Depression. Yes, this place is deep in my heart. Everything that has been good in my life began here.
The President. Well, Mr. Adams,1 to the teachers here at this school, and to all of you students, I can't quite describe what a pleasure this is for us. We're here because we heard about this school. We heard what beginning with one man to save a school has developed into an educational institution of which you all must be very proud, because there aren't too many educational institutions in the country that can match your record. And we had to see this for ourselves—not just to see it for ourselves but also because we hope that we can spread the word.
And maybe I can illustrate what I'm trying to say was when I was Governor of California, every year they used to bring to the capital a group of students who'd come from other countries and who, on an exchange-student basis, would spend a year in our schools, usually in high school. And every year I had the same question for them. I would say, "Tell me"—these students from all over, Europe and every place else—I'd say, "Tell me, how do our schools compare? Are they tougher than yours? Is the work harder?" And then I'd have to wait until they stopped laughing. That was their assessment of the difference, and I'm talking about schools that weren't like yours. I wish we could get some of them in here. I don't think they'd laugh, because I think they'd find out that you met the same educational levels they do.
The President. Bless you, and I'm glad you asked that question about the college loans and so forth and the educational help. Much has been made of this, and it's been badly distorted in the reporting.
I was under the impression—and maybe I was wrong—I didn't know there were any court cases pending—but I was under the impression that the problem of segregated schools had been settled, that we have desegregation. But I was getting complaints-and even before I got here as President, I was getting complaints that some of the Internal Revenue agents, the tax collectors that collect the income tax, were harassing some schools, even though they were desegregated—but harassing them and threatening them with taking away their tax exemption-which educational institutions have-if they didn't oh, set up scholarship programs or go out actively recruiting and take steps to try and increase their efforts at desegregation. And I didn't think that this was the place of Treasury agents to be doing this. So, I told the Secretary at Treasury that I didn't think that. I think as individuals we get harassed enough by the Internal Revenue collectors. And I didn't know that there were a couple of legal cases pending.
You must be aware that there are millions and millions of parents all over this country terribly dissatisfied with the education their children are getting in schools—the lack of discipline and everything else. And with that deterioration in so much of education you are such a shining light that, as I said in the beginning, I want to spread the word. This is the way it should be done. You're doing it.
Those particular schools—particularly parochial schools—have been failing by the thousands under the inflation that we've been having in recent years. And it seems to us that since these families are actually paying to support two school systems—the ones that they choose and prefer to send their children to and at the same time paying the full load that everyone else pays for public education—that there is some justice in making allowance for this.
The President. No, I haven't taken a position. I have seen—and over the years, I've seen this proposal of a flat tax, no deductions, simply a gross tax—like you have to pay your agent. [Laughter] But the thing is, I think it's not as simple as it sounds, because I think there are differences in—well, what—would it have an effect on all those institutions—educational, artistic, humanitarian-that exist on contributions? What would it do to some people? I recall one—I won't name him, he is now deceased—but in the last years of his life was giving his total income to a very charitable medical cause—total. And I'm just—I just wonder if it's—if we've—maybe there's a happy medium. Maybe there's a way where you can leave some things. What about a family that has the same income as another family but has a long-time catastrophic illness to care for in the family?
A number of problems were discussed during the campaign and I see no reason to change the subject now. Campaign oratory on the issues of crime, pollution of air and water, conservation, welfare and expanded educational facilities does not mean the issues will go away because the campaign has ended. Problems remain to be solved and they challenge all of us. Government will lead, of course, but the answer must come from all you.
But this is not the ultimate answer. Only private industry in the last analysis can provide jobs with a future. Lieutenant Governor Robert Finch will be liaison between government and the private sector in an all-out program of job training and education leading to real employment.
On the subject of education ... hundreds of thousands of young men and women will receive an education in our state colleges and universities. We are proud of our ability to provide this opportunity for our youth and we believe it is no denial of academic freedom to provide this education within a framework of reasonable rules and regulations. Nor is it a violation of individual rights to require obedience to these rules and regulations or to insist that those unwilling to abide by them should get their education elsewhere.
We have every right to dream heroic dreams. Those who say that we're in a time when there are not heroes, they just don't know where to look. You can see heroes every day going in and out of factory gates. Others, a handful in number, produce enough food to feed all of us and then the world beyond. You meet heroes across a counter, and they're on both sides of that counter. There are entrepreneurs with faith in themselves and faith in an idea who create new jobs, new wealth and opportunity. They're individuals and families whose taxes support the government and whose voluntary gifts support church, charity, culture, art, and education. Their patriotism is quiet, but deep. Their values sustain our national life.
The President. I have not retreated from that at all. Yes. The process, however, that I have asked for is for both Secretary Bell of Education and Secretary Jim Edwards of Energy to reorganize, to produce the most effective streamlining of their Departments that they can—in Education, to look at the appropriate role of the Federal Government in education, if there is one, and to report back. And then we will decide, making our recommendations. Much the same thing holds true with the Department of Energy. The reason for this being that while they were new Cabinet-level agencies, they incorporated government functions and programs that had been going on in them, and they came under that umbrella. And we have to find out which of those functions that have been a Federal Government function continue and where they would best fit.
Now, already some have protested that there must be no reduction in aid to schools. Well, let me point out that Federal aid to education amounts to only 8 percent of the total educational funding, and for this 8 percent, the Federal Government has insisted on tremendously disproportionate share of control over our schools. Whatever reductions we've proposed in that 8 percent will amount to very little in the total cost of education. They will, however, restore more authority to States and local school districts.
None of the recent movies about that war have found time to show those examples of humanitarianism. In 1969 alone, United States Army volunteers helped construct 1,253 schools and 597 hospitals and dispensaries, contributing $300,000 from their own pockets. Marines from the Third Amphibious Force helped build 268 classrooms, 75 dispensaries, 78 churches, temples, and pagodas. Marines contributed $40,000 to ensure an education for 935 children. Air Force men gave their money and their own labor to 1,218 schools, medical facilities, and orphanages. Air Force doctors, dentists, and medics treated 390,000 Vietnamese in volunteeer programs.
We've also begun taking action on particularly controversial rules. For example, rules mandating extensive bilingual education programs, passive restraints in large cars, the unnecessary labeling of chemicals in the workplace, controls on garbage truck noise, and increased overtime payments for executives have been withdrawn or postponed. These actions alone are expected to save the American public and industry almost $1 billion annually.
Now, bilingual education—there is a need, but there is also a purpose that has been distorted, again at the Federal level. Where there are predominantly students speaking a foreign language at home, coming to school and being taught in English, and they fall behind or are unable to keep up in some subjects because of the lack of knowledge of the language, I think it is proper that we have teachers equipped who can get at them in their own language and understand why it is they don't get the answer to the problem and help them in that way. But it is absolutely wrong and against the American concept to have a bilingual education program that is now openly, admittedly dedicated to preserving their native language and never getting them adequate in English so they can go out into the job market and participate. [Applause] Thank you.
We had a program in California—again, I call on that. We had an education program in the schools. We had former drug users who had straightened out. We found that they were most effective in talking to young people. You could go in, I could go in, anyone else and try to talk to these young people and tell them the harm in this and get nowhere. But when someone stood in front of them who said, "I've been there, and this what it was like, and this is why I'm standing here telling you today," we found they listened.
The President. I couldn't agree more, and I assure you, we're not going to do that. Now, I just heard someone on the air yesterday and talking about tremendous cuts in educational funding and so forth. What they forget is that Federal funding of education only amounts to 10 percent of the cost of education, and they don't make that plain. This man was talking as if, why, there's going to be a 25-percent cut in the overall support for education. Well, 25 percent of 10 percent is 2% percent. And we feel that a lot of the Federal Government's aid to education has resulted in unnecessary interference in education, which, in reality, has probably undone a lot of the help that the money would be by forcing added expense on the schools.
I had a college president tell me the other day that the paperwork, the administrative work required now for government help in his college has made his administrative cost for that go from $50,000 a year in his campus to $650,000 a year. Now, that'd hire a lot of professors that could teach. And so, we feel that we're not going to do anything to hurt education, and we think we are going to put it back in the hands of people that are closer to the scene and out of here. And I'm confident—we have an educator as the Secretary of that department right now. So, believe me, education has a good voice in our circles.
All of this has led to the misuse of power and preemption of the prerogatives of people and their social institutions. You are graduating from a great private, or, if you will, independent university. Not too many years ago, such schools were relatively free from government interference. In recent years, government has spawned regulations covering virtually every facet of our lives. The independent and church-supported colleges and universities have found themselves enmeshed in that network of regulations and the costly blizzard of paperwork that government is demanding. Thirty-four congressional committees and almost 80 subcommittees have jurisdiction over 439 separate laws affecting education at the college level alone. Almost every aspect of campus life is now regulated—hiring, firing, promotions, physical plant, construction, record-keeping, fund-raising and, to some extent, curriculum and educational programs.
Nancy and I consider it a great pleasure to be here today to congratulate you who have successfully completed your education and training at the United States Military Academy. I'm a little self-conscious being introduced as your Commander when I began my military career as a second lieutenant in the Cavalry, the horse Cavalry, that is. [Laughter] I have threatened on occasion that that was the reason I got this job was so that I could reinstitute the horse Cavalry. [Laughter]
Already enlistments are up, and so are reenlistments. And surprisingly—well, maybe we shouldn't be surprised—many who have already left the service are now returning. There's also been a decided rise in quality as measured by educational and testing attainment. Something other than pay and benefits contributed to this.
I'm trying to find out something about his boyhood, because we didn't live on the wrong side of the railroad tracks, but we lived so close to them we could hear the whistle real loud. And I know very much about the working group. I grew up in poverty and got what education I got all by myself and so forth, and I think it is sheer demagoguery to pretend that this economic program which we've submitted is not aimed at helping the great cross section of people in this country that have been burdened for too long by big government and high taxes. From 10 to 50 to 60 thousand dollars covers, certainly, all the middle class, and they pay 72 percent of the tax. And 73 percent of our tax relief or more is going to that bracket of workers. And we're going to do our utmost to keep that bottom rung of the ladder clear for those people that haven't yet started to climb.
The same holds true with the block grant proposals. I can't, in good conscience, believe that we should cut over 80 health, education, and social programs by 25 percent and then leave the Federal overhead and the bureaucratic red tape intact. It's the wrong approach. I know that the 50 Governors are ready to go with us all the way on the block grants and take the cut. And they say they'll make it work if we'll give them the flexibility to run those programs as they believe they should be run when they get to their level. And I speak with some experience from having been in that spot. And I know how much of the total spending is just sheer administrative overhead and waste.
Can the black teenager who faces a staggering unemployment rate feel that government policies are a success? Can the black wage earner who sees more and more of his take-home pay shrinking because of government taxes feel satisfied? Can black parents say, despite a massive influx of Federal aid, that educational standards in our schools have improved appreciably? Can the women I saw on television recently—whose family had been on welfare for three generations and who feared that her children might be the fourth—can she believe that current government policies will save her children from such a fate?
In the months ahead, as the administration is free to turn attention from the economic program to other needs of America, we'll be advancing proposals on a number of issues of concern to this convention. The inner cities, for example, should be communities, neighborhoods, not warehouses of despair where children are bused out and ineffectual Federal funds are bused in. I believe that with the aid of commonsense government assistance and the use of free enterprise zones, with less reliance on busing and more reliance on better, basic education, and with an emphasis on local activism, such as you represent, communities can be reinvigorated.
Certainly, we're all inspired by the wonderful example of Marva Collins in Chicago, the gallant lady who has the educational grit to make Shakespeare admirers out of inner-city children. She just proves to me what a friend of mine, Wilson Riles, California's superintendent of education, used to say: "The concept that black children can't learn unless they're sitting among white children is utter and complete nonsense." Now, Dr. Riles was not suggesting that integration isn't a good and proper thing; it is. And it's good for all of us when it's brought about with commonsense and attention to what is best for the children.
We plan to take a look, a comprehensive look, at the education of blacks from primary school upward and strengthen the base of black colleges, which are a sound educational investment. They are more than that. They're a proud tradition, a symbol of black determination and accomplishment, and I feel deeply they must be preserved. We've increased the share of Department of Education Title III funds spend on black colleges, and that trend will continue.
On regulatory relief, the entire Government is working to ease the burden. And someday, maybe the blizzard of paperwork will be just a light snowstorm for the private sector, for education, and for State and local governments.
FDR brought the colors of hope and confidence to the era and I, like millions of others, became an enthusiastic New Dealer. We followed FDR because he offered a mix of ideas and movement. A former Governor himself, I believe that FDR would today be amazed and appalled at the growth of the Federal Government's power. Too many in government in recent years have invoked his name to justify what they were doing, forgetting that it was FDR who said, "In the conduct of public utilities, of banks, of insurance, of agriculture, of education, of social welfare—Washington must be discouraged from interfering."
Secretary of Education Bell withdrew proposed rules that would have required a particular form of bilingual education—at a cost to school boards of over a billion dollars over the first 5 years. But while there's a need for bilingual education, it's absolutely wrong-headed to encourage and preserve native languages instead of teaching the language of our land to the non-English speaking, so they can have the keys to opportunity.
Now, one last thing. I know there's been a lot of concern about the volunteer military and would it work or were we going to have to resort to a draft. And as you all know, I've been campaigning up and down the country that I'm opposed to a peacetime draft. We never had had one until the years following World War II. And we've taken some steps. We've taken some steps for a realistic pay scale that we want for the men in the military. And I'm happy to tell you tonight that the enlistments are up, higher than they've ever been. The educational and quality level of the men enlisting is higher than it has ever been. The percentile of the lowest in education that we take in the military is the lowest that it has ever been.
It should never be forgotten that when educational opportunities were denied elsewhere, these institutions offered hope to black Americans—hope for a better life and hope that someday they would break the bonds of prejudice and discrimination.
These educational institutions did their job well. They have produced 50 percent of the black business executives, 75 percent of the black military officers, 80 percent of the black judges, and 85 percent of black physicians in this country.
The Black colleges and universities in America have offered black citizens a variety of opportunities to develop their skills and talents, and it's through such diversity that freedom flourishes. And it is through education, the education they offer, that individuals can make themselves into the type of people they choose to be and not what some central planner says they should be.
In pursuit of equal opportunity for black Americans, economics becomes as important as education. For a long period of our history, black people were prevented the chance of bettering themselves not only because they were denied the opportunity to learn, but because job opportunities were limited as well. It will do no good to educate young people if there are no jobs for them once they get out of school. And you, more than any of our citizens, know how important a vibrant economy is to the progress of black Americans, particularly, and all Americans as well.
With this in mind, with a serious commitment to protecting these unique educational institutions, we've made certain that in an era of budget cuts, black colleges and universities will actually receive a $9.6 million increase in Federal title III funds. Now, this is a jump of almost 8 percent. In our continuing review of Executive orders, we found a need to improve upon an existing order on historically black colleges, and that's why I was happy today to sign that new order that will strengthen the Federal commitment to the historic black colleges, while seeking new ways for the private sector to increase its support for these vital institutions.1
I'm very happy to sign this Executive order which commits the Federal Government to more support with regard to our historic black colleges, and also it commits us to a program of encouraging more private support with those same educational institutions. So, without further ado—because I'll be talking to you later— [laughter] —I'm going to put my name on the Executive order.
We should remember that just as in the past, the future of these schools will depend more than anything else on the efforts of black Americans. What has been accomplished already is a tremendous source of pride, but now is not the time to rest on past accomplishments. The future depends on an even stronger commitment to excellence and diversity in education. And to paraphrase the motto of the United Negro College Fund: Let us recognize that America's historic black college is a "terrible thing to waste." And we're not going to allow it to be wasted.
"He has examined the options, as I suggested, and the choices he's made are taking him far away from me. He believes there are opportunities for him in education, travel, and experience. No doubt there are. There's a stack of thirsty terry towels I bought for a college basketball player. He left them here. He left the shampoo and soap and cords and sweaters, too. He won't need those things. His country will now provide for all his needs. He thinks he's getting a good deal. No doubt he is. Personally, I'm inclined to believe the country is getting the good deal. In exchange for all their provisions, they are getting one tall, tanned fellow with summer bleached hair, a sharp young mind, more potential and possibility than I have the space here to describe.
Our interest payments on the debt alone are now running more than $96 billion a year. That's more than the total combined profits last year of the 500 biggest companies in the country; or, to put it another way, Washington spends more on interest than on all of its education, nutrition, and medical programs combined.
Similarly, education is the principal responsibility of local school systems, teachers, parents, citizen boards, and State governments. By eliminating the Department of Education less than 2 years after it was created, we cannot only reduce the budget but ensure that local needs and preferences, rather than the wishes of Washington, determine the education of our children.
Before World War I, the Rockefeller and Carnegie Foundations together spent twice as much as the government for education and social services—simply because there was a need. The National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis set out to conquer polio with dimes—and did it. And in a fitting symbol of America, our own Statue of Liberty was built with the nickels and dimes of French schoolchildren and the contributions of their parents.
I'm instructing the Cabinet to review agency procedures and regulations and identify barriers to private sector involvement. We want to deregulate community service. For example, mothers and grandmothers have been taking care of children for thousands of years without special college training. Why is it that certain States prohibit anyone without a college degree in early childhood education from operating a day care facility?
The best I can figure it, Mr. President, the part of this award that is concerned with me, is my public service not my private service to the private sector. And that's the part that concerns me most—the public service started when you were 27 years old. This is when I came to Washington from Oklahoma City. I came here to spend 1 year and to complete my education and then go back to Oklahoma and teach school. Well, that never did happen. Things happened to me instead. The war came-that's for one. And then came Truman and Eisenhower and all the rest and a whole phantasmagoria of spectaculars. We all remember the gigantic events of our country and the world.
I think we can see a parallel between the recent decline in our Nation's economy and its educational system. In each case, serious problems grew worse because of neglect, and because of misguided policies by people who viewed the world the way they wanted it to be, rather than the way it really is.
The first and most important of those principles is that education does not begin with Washington officials, or even State and local officials. It begins in the home, where it is the right and the responsibility of every parent. Our educational institutions—both public and private— exist to assist families in the instruction of their children. We sometimes forget this, and act as though things were the other way around.
A second principle, true in education just as in our economy, is that excellence demands competition. Competition among students and among schools. And why not? We must always meet our obligations to those who would fall behind without our assistance. But let's remember something else too: Without a race there can be no champion. No records broken, no excellence—in education or any other walk of life.
A third principle is diversity, which is absolutely essential to the American way of life. Nowhere is this more important than in education. Pluralism in American education has always been one of the strengths of our society and we welcome the recent resurgence of independent schools.
Finally, let me just say a word about a fourth kind of principle—the one that teaches us there really is a difference between right and wrong. I think it's time we took a good look at this moral side of contemporary schooling. How, for example, can we expect to restore educational excellence in schools still plagued by drug abuse and crime and chronic absenteeism?
A society that recognizes the enduring significance of the arts and the humanities to the quality and to the future of our civilization will set high value also on diversity and on independence of initiative. This conviction asserts a confidence in the power and possibilities of scholarship and of education at their best, a dedication to the values and to the varieties of the creative and performing arts at their most vital. It rests on a regard for the cultivation of inherited tradition and also for encouraging the risk-taking that gives rise to new forms of learning and artistic accomplishment.
Specifically, we've encouraged policies which reduce or eliminate subsidies to food consumers and provide adequate and stable price incentives to their agricultural sectors to increase production. We'll emphasize education and innovative joint research and development activities throughout the United States and developing countries' institutions. We will also encourage rural credit, improved storage and distribution facilities, and roads to facilitate marketing.
And this isn't original with me. This was first suggested when the first proposal for Federal aid to education was made. Norris Cotton, then Senator from New Hampshire, looking at the amount of money that was suggested—and the Federal Government was protesting that it meant no interference; just wanted to help by giving money—and he said, "Well, if that's really true," he said, "why don't we turn the tobacco tax over to the States and the only restriction is that it be used for education?" And you know how they defeated him? They said, "Well, it wouldn't be right to educate our children with a sin tax." So the Federal Government got its foot in the door and went on from there. That's all we want to stop or change.
But I would think that first of all, education-we built the greatest school system the world has ever seen and built it at the local level and the local school district level. And then the Federal Government got into the school business only by having preempted so much of the tax resources, and those tax resources that grew with the economy faster than something like the property tax, which is the principal basis for educational funding. Then they got into it through that money thing, having preempted the money, created the problem, and then they said, "Well, now we want to help you." But in return for the help, they wanted to also regulate, and have interfered to a large extent.
I would think that this would include such things as welfare; certainly, it would include education. And then with this, under this federalism, review again what legitimately and honestly belongs at the Federal level and at the local level in the system of taxes.
It's fashionable just now to talk about the graying of America. And if' you go by the numbers, we are indeed a people growing older in years. Today, one American in five, more than 45 million in all, is over 55. By the year 2000, there will be another 10 million of us. But the American people are not just growing older; we're also growing healthier. Our years of full, active life are increasing—thanks to the countless historic breakthroughs our nation has made in science, medicine, technology, economic opportunity, and education in this century. And here again our generation can take pride in the contributions we made to bring that about.
I am opposed with every fiber of my being to discrimination, and to have set in law the fact that tax exemptions could be denied to schools that—and educational institutions that practiced discrimination. Now, as I say, it probably wasn't handled as well as it could, because, it being in our minds a procedural matter—and in my mind, certainly—we didn't anticipate that it was going to be as misinterpreted as it was. And what we have accomplished with what we did was we've prevented the IRS from determining national social policy all by itself. It'll now be by elected officials, the Congress.
I have already explained myself with regard to the discrimination in education, and I think that my record will stand for itself, if anyone wants to look at it, that I have been on the side of opposition to bigotry and discrimination and prejudice—and long before it ever became a kind of national issue under the title of civil rights. And my life has been spent on that side.
The President. No, I don't believe so. All we're doing is what every administration before us has done and we hadn't been doing. It's simply a case so that we all know what is going on. And, also, we've seen the situation when it would have been very, I think, educational for the people and advantageous for us if two or three particular issues could have been brought before the public; and because of not checking with each other, we found three separate departments all going at once with their statements.
Now, there are a number of programs that are going forward. For example, in five States, started by the governments—which ought to restore some people's faith that our turning back of things to the State governments is not—in these five States they have started programs, not statewide, but in several important, key cities as an experiment-and a very successful one so far—in which the private sector is involved in taking the least-likely-to-succeed seniors in high school into job-training programs. They don't go for the best—they don't, those they figure—but they found some actual statistics of the percentage of high school students that were—you could really conceive that they were going to have trouble when they got out and they probably were not going to go on to any additional education in college or anything. And 60 percent of them wind up within 2 years on welfare. So, they started this experiment, and it has been, I think it's something like up in the 90 percent of salvage of these students who were judged by their associates and their teachers and so forth to be the least likely to make it.
In 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grant programs, costing $7 billion. When I took office, there were approximately 500, costing nearly a hundred billion dollars—13 programs for energy, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education. And here in the Congress, it takes at least 166 committees just to try to keep track of them.
In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. The total amount flowing into this fund will be $28 billion a year. Over the next 4 years the States can use this money in either of two ways. If they want to continue receiving Federal grants in such areas as transportation, education, and social services, they can use their trust fund money to pay for the grants. Or to the extent they choose to forgo the Federal grant programs, they can use their trust fund money on their own for those or other purposes. There will be a mandatory pass-through of part of these funds to local governments.
Mr. President, I grew up in a small town in the Midwest of our country, and in the tiny school where I received my initial education, our history books taught us about the magnificent 7,000-year-old culture that grew and prospered along the Nile. I remember wondering what kind of people they were—those people who laid the foundation for Western civilization. Well, today, we Americans know the Egyptian people well, their courage and nobility, and we're proud to have you as our friends.
Let us go forward with our conviction that education doesn't begin with Washington officials or State officials or local officials. It begins with the family, where it is the right and the responsibility of every parent. And that responsibility, I think, includes teaching children respect for skin color that is different than their own; religious beliefs that are different from their own. It includes conveying the message to the young as well as to the old that racial discrimination and religious bigotry have no place in a free society.
America's needs today are too great for one partner to solve alone. As I pointed out in the State of the Union address, in 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grants costing $7 billion. When I took office there were approximately 500 such grants, costing nearly $100 billion—13 programs for energy conservation, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education—and in the Congress it takes at least 166 committees just to try and keep track of them. They try to keep track of them, but Federal grants are like rabbits—they multiply like crazy, and when they're out you can't catch them. [Laughter]
The other aspect of the plan is a turnback of responsibilities to the States for over 40 Federal programs in education, community development, transportation, and social services—along with the resources to pay for them. In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. By 1988 the States will be in complete control of these grant programs.
Our initial program includes the transfer to the States of more than 40 Federal programs in the areas of education, development, and social services, and we want to send back the tax sources to pay for them, as well. But the centerpiece of the proposal is the almost dollar-for-dollar swap of two of the largest areas of welfare. The Federal Government would take over Medicaid in exchange for State assumption of Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps.
Well, here in Iowa you have a strong two-party system. Your Governor, Bob Ray, has provided strong leadership, and your congressional delegation, led by Senators Roger Jepsen and Chuck Grassley, serve you and our country well. Innovation and reform have been the hallmarks of this legislature. Your reapportionment plan has been called a model for the country. You've made significant advances against waste and fraud and have a tradition of top-quality public education.
His feats were harvested from the seeds of exceptional character. He lacked higher education, but he pulled himself up with years of training and hard work. He was a man of deep faith who believed the pillars of society were religion, morality, and bonds of brotherhood between all citizens.
We're cutting the size of the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
As chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, he played an instrumental role in enacting last year's budget cuts. They were, incidentally, the biggest cuts that have ever been made in the history of this country. And let me say he handled those budget cuts with as much skill and precision as he flew the spacecraft that took him to the Moon. He was careful, and he did no harm to the programs that genuinely serve the needy or provided sound education value to our children.
You know, right now, because of some changes that we're making with regard to the Department of Education, there seems to be spreading in a kind of a wave among some people that—well, we're trying to do away with or lower educational quality. Not so. There are those in Washington who, ever since they turned to Federal aid to education, intended Federal control of education, and that interference by the Federal Government has hurt the quality of education from coast to coast in this country.
A starting point for that dialog is the broad proposal that I outlined during my State of the Union address. Briefly, it suggests the transfer of 45 categorical programs to the States. "Categorical"—let me interrupt and say—means that the Federal Government issues the grant, mandates the program, and then tells you at the local level exactly how you have to run it and what you have to do. And there's no way that people 3,000 miles away can tell every diverse section of this country to abide by the same rules and regulations. Along with the funding sources, flexibility and authority to manage them has gone. Now, this list includes everything from education to community development, from transportation to social services, programs that have traditionally and rightfully belonged at the State level.
Come to Alabama and see how concern for education and commitment to equal opportunity, including a war on illiteracy, consumes almost two-thirds of State spending and ranks Alabama fifth in the Nation in spending on elementary and secondary education.
Well, as you probably know, our plan to restore the proper State-Federal balance has two major components. Starting in fiscal 1984, the Federal Government will assume full responsibility for the cost of the rapidly growing Medicaid program, in exchange for the States picking up Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps. Now, the other aspect of the plan is a turnback of responsibilities to the States for over 40 Federal programs in education, community development, transportation, and social services—along with the resources to pay for them. In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the States. By 1988 the States will be in full control of these grant programs.
We've proposed the broad outlines of a plan to restore accountability to government. It includes the transfer to our States of more than 40 Federal programs in the areas of education, transportation, community development, and social services. And we want to send back to you the tax sources to pay for them as well. The centerpiece of the proposal is the almost dollar-for-dollar swap of two of the largest areas of welfare. The Federal Government would take over Medicaid in exchange for State assumption of Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps,
Working out details for such a change of direction is never easy. Perhaps a starting point for the dialog can be the broad proposal that I outlined during my State of the Union message. Briefly, it suggests the transfer of 45 categorical programs to the States, along with the funding sources and authority to manage them. The list includes everything from education to community development, from transportation to social services.
The battle against discrimination still goes on, and much remains to be done. But in a single generation, an entire nation recommitted itself to the cause of equal rights and used the full force of the law to ban once and for all racial bias in public education, in hiring, and in the voting booth.
I wasn't exactly properly dressed for the occasion, but I couldn't resist getting in line and joining them for the little time I was there. Now, a roster of their names would probably reveal a variety of ethnic backgrounds. As would be true of any group of Americans, they included different races and religions, I know—but who asked? And the line was coeducational—girls and boys. Looking at their fresh, wholesome and, yes, happy, enthusiastic faces, even though they'd been there since early morning, I was looking at the future of America and, believe me, the future looked mighty good.
One of the greatest roadblocks to jobtraining and personal advancement is inadequate education. This problem is especially troubling in the black community, where too many of our black children are not acquiring the skills they will need. Led by Dr. Nathan Wright and Mrs. Leon Sullivan, black Americans are planning to mobilize over 60 major organizations and 500,000 black community volunteers to attack this problem at its root. The drive will be called the National Assault on Illiteracy program, and you can be sure that we'll be looking to help them any way we can.
—Nearly 7 million separate loans or awards will be available for students in higher education through Federal assistance programs. Since the college-level population numbers only slightly more than 11 million, that means that better than one out of every two students has the opportunity for assistance. The 1983 budget provides more than $12 billion in total tuition support, nearly three times the level available just as recently as 1977.
For all the media talk about fairness, you might not have heard that our 1983 budget will spend nearly three times as much for tuition support for higher education than was available in 1977. Better than one out of every two students will be eligible for assistance. Through Medicaid and Medicare, the Federal Government will pay for the medical care of 99 percent of those Americans over the age 65. Twenty-eight percent of all Federal spending will go to the elderly-an average of $7,850 per senior citizen in payments and services. The Federal Government will still subsidize approximately 95 million meals per day—14 percent of all the meals served. And about $2.8 billion will be spent on job training and employment.
But I have come to speak with you today about other subjects of mutual concern-about the strength and the future of American families, about the education of their children, and about the increasing strains placed on both by current levels of taxation. I believe that working Americans are overtaxed and under appreciated, and I have come to Chicago to offer relief. I have come to propose further restoration of the incentives and the choices that were our inheritance and that encouraged our people to build the greatest nation on Earth.
In 1980, while campaigning, I promised to base this administration's policies on the primacy of parental rights and responsibility. I pledged to expand education opportunities by supporting a tuition tax credit plan that would permit parents to take a credit on their income tax for each child they have in private school. And today, as your President, I keep that pledge.
In 1979 a majority of all parents who had children in private elementary and secondary schools had incomes of $25,000 or less. Secondary school parents pay average tuition costs of $900, while also supporting their community public schools through local taxes. Our proposal is intended to relieve, as I've said before, that dual financial burden threatening to usurp the traditional right of parents to direct the education of their children.
Today, more than 5 million American youngsters attend thousands of religious and independent schools because of emphasis on values or the type of teaching available. Their parents have made that choice at great cost and sacrifice. They've made it because the education of their children is their greatest concern.
Senator Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, said a few years ago— [applause] —I'11 tell him you responded to that— [laughter] —"It's time that we acknowledged the ordinary family's insistence on providing its children with the best obtainable education results in costs that the Federal Government should help it to bear—not by giving it a handout or a gift, but simply by allowing it to keep a bit more of the money it earns for itself." Well, I wholeheartedly agree, and I think most of you do as well.
It's no accident that we who are the freest people on Earth have an educational system unrivaled in the history of civilization. We know that knowledge and freedom are inseparable, and we also acknowledge the right of every individual to both. They cannot be arbitrarily apportioned according to race, station, or class.
Private education is no divisive threat to our system of education; it is an important part of it. Our public schools offer quality education to our children and are the heart of our communities. We must ensure that their classrooms continue to provide the finest education possible. But alternatives to public education tend to strengthen public education. Taken together, public and private institutions sustain the diversity that has made our culture rich.
Excellence demands competition among students and among schools. And why not? We must always meet our obligation to those who would fall behind without our assistance. But let's remember, without a race there can be no champion, no records broken, no excellence—in education or any other walk of life.
This freedom to choose what type of education is best for each child has contributed much to America's reputation for excellence in education. Unfortunately, the high plane of literacy and the diversity of education we have achieved is threatened by policymakers who seem to prefer uniform mediocrity to the rich variety that has been our heritage.
Our leaders must remember that education doesn't begin with some isolated bureaucrat in Washington. It doesn't even begin with State or local officials. Education begins in the home, where it's a parental right and responsibility. Both our public and our private schools exist to aid our families in the instruction of our children, and it's time some people back in Washington stopped acting as if family wishes were only getting in the way.
This city of Chicago is a good example of the strength that pluralism and freedom of choice have provided our people. Chicago has long been a magnet for immigrants who have come to this country to make a better life. For them, education was not simply another part of American society—it was the key that opened the golden door. It was the best path to progress for their families. And it's been an indispensable part of the growth of our nation and the prosperity of all our people.
Such statistics explain why Americans at every economic level believe education is still something to sacrifice for. It still offers the promise of a better life. It's still the hope of our people.
Well, those Americans have not forgotten what education and freedom can do. They know that freedom is the only truly essential possession we have, and education is freedom's guide. These are not easy times for a great many Americans, but the future looks dark only for those who've lost faith in our people and in the promise of individuals who are educated and free. The rest of us should welcome the future, knowing that with God's help it is ours to shape.
Together with your colleagues in other independent and public schools, you are molding each rising generation. You're working with parents to fill young minds with the knowledge and young hearts with the morality, the understanding and compassion that they will need to live in happiness and fulfillment. In the meantime, we in Washington must make sure that freedom, the other half of education, is still secure when your students graduate.
We must make sure that the incentives to use their education are not destroyed by an oppressive taxation. We must be sure the Federal Government doesn't soak up the lion's share of our gross national product, that regulations don't choke off technology, and that interest rates don't ruin the dream of self-employment.
—In all, Federal programs will provide over $12 billion to education aid to students. And this amount will provide for 7 million grants and loans, giving assistance to almost half of all the students in the country who will enroll in college during the next school year.
Years ago, the Secretary of the Massachusetts Board of Education, Horace Mann, said education "beyond all other devices of human origin is a great equalizer of the conditions of men—the balance wheel of the social machinery."
The immigrants who came to Chicago, the poor in our inner cities, the middle classes struggling to make ends meet—these Americans still believe the American dream. They still yearn for prosperity and still sacrifice so that their children will enjoy it. They mark progress by the level of education reached by members of their families. Parents who never finished high school send their children to college. Each generation stands upon the shoulders of the one before as our nation and our people reach for the stars.
We must keep those dreams alive. We must provide the learning, shape the understanding, and encourage the spirit each generation will need to discover, to create, and to improve the lot of man. But we must also preserve the freedom they will need both to pursue that education and to use it.
The President. Well, this will not allow any government interference in any way in education, because the aid is going directly to the parents of children who are going to the schools. So, this will not lead to any government direction or interference in any way in education, if that was the meaning of your question.
The President. Support Catholic education of schools? No, this is ruled to be the separation of church and state that they can't do that, but this is why we're proposing a program that we think will help, by getting the aid through the tax credits directly to the parents and that this will help solve the problem.
Second, the overwhelming majority of students in the main private schools or the parochial schools, the religious schools in America, the overwhelming majority come from families with incomes of $25,000 or less. In Chicago, for example, 40 percent of the students in the Catholic schools of Chicago are black. And there seems to be a greater urge on the part of our minority citizens to get that kind of education, because in too many areas the public school system apparently is just not doing the job that they want done for their children. So, we'll make very sure that it cannot be distorted.
Now, Bill and I aren't asking you to take over the social welfare system. We're just asking that you give generously of your time, your know-how, and your imagination to help Americans help themselves. Many of you already do. When we say Chamber of Commerce, what comes to mind?—community leadership in economic development, job creation, education, medical care and special assistance to the elderly, the disabled, and the blind. American business does care and is involved. Just keep doing what you do best, and ask more of those around you to pitch in and help.
We're cutting the number of people in the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education—agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
The Class of '32 has no yearbook to record our final days on the campus. The Class of '33 didn't put out a Prism because of the hardships of that Great Depression era. The faculty sometimes went for months on end without pay. And yet this school made it possible for young men and women, myself included, to get an education even though we were totally without funds, our families destitute victims of the Depression. Yes, this place is deep in my heart. Everything that has been good in my life began here.
The President. Well, Mr. Adams,1 to the teachers here at this school, and to all of you students, I can't quite describe what a pleasure this is for us. We're here because we heard about this school. We heard what beginning with one man to save a school has developed into an educational institution of which you all must be very proud, because there aren't too many educational institutions in the country that can match your record. And we had to see this for ourselves—not just to see it for ourselves but also because we hope that we can spread the word.
And maybe I can illustrate what I'm trying to say was when I was Governor of California, every year they used to bring to the capital a group of students who'd come from other countries and who, on an exchange-student basis, would spend a year in our schools, usually in high school. And every year I had the same question for them. I would say, "Tell me"—these students from all over, Europe and every place else—I'd say, "Tell me, how do our schools compare? Are they tougher than yours? Is the work harder?" And then I'd have to wait until they stopped laughing. That was their assessment of the difference, and I'm talking about schools that weren't like yours. I wish we could get some of them in here. I don't think they'd laugh, because I think they'd find out that you met the same educational levels they do.
The President. Bless you, and I'm glad you asked that question about the college loans and so forth and the educational help. Much has been made of this, and it's been badly distorted in the reporting.
I was under the impression—and maybe I was wrong—I didn't know there were any court cases pending—but I was under the impression that the problem of segregated schools had been settled, that we have desegregation. But I was getting complaints-and even before I got here as President, I was getting complaints that some of the Internal Revenue agents, the tax collectors that collect the income tax, were harassing some schools, even though they were desegregated—but harassing them and threatening them with taking away their tax exemption-which educational institutions have-if they didn't oh, set up scholarship programs or go out actively recruiting and take steps to try and increase their efforts at desegregation. And I didn't think that this was the place of Treasury agents to be doing this. So, I told the Secretary at Treasury that I didn't think that. I think as individuals we get harassed enough by the Internal Revenue collectors. And I didn't know that there were a couple of legal cases pending.
You must be aware that there are millions and millions of parents all over this country terribly dissatisfied with the education their children are getting in schools—the lack of discipline and everything else. And with that deterioration in so much of education you are such a shining light that, as I said in the beginning, I want to spread the word. This is the way it should be done. You're doing it.
Those particular schools—particularly parochial schools—have been failing by the thousands under the inflation that we've been having in recent years. And it seems to us that since these families are actually paying to support two school systems—the ones that they choose and prefer to send their children to and at the same time paying the full load that everyone else pays for public education—that there is some justice in making allowance for this.
We reviewed the progress that we've achieved in augmenting our bilateral relations, the Bi-National Committee for Economic Relations that Secretary Baldrige chaired last January, the Joint Military Commission that held its first meeting last month, and the agreement establishing a binational commission for a cultural and education exchange that Secretary Haig signed in Morocco in February.
Many of our earliest settlers came to America seeking a refuge where they could worship God unhindered, so our dedication to individual freedom is wedded to religious freedom as well. Liberty has never meant license to Americans. We treasure it precisely because it protects the human and spiritual values that we hold most dear: the right to worship as we choose, the right to elect democratic leaders, the right to choose the type of education we want for our children, and freedom from fear, want, and oppression. These are God-given freedoms, not the contrivances of man.
It's a matter in this drug abuse of getting out and doing something about a problem that for too long has been mainly discussed and debated. And I have heard from Nancy—and I'm very proud of what she's been doing—with regard to the various parent groups that have sprung up throughout the country, in visiting and learning there of their efforts and the success that they've had with regard to young people. And she's told me how effective education and prevention can be, and I know that she's going to continue in those efforts as all the others are.
And while I'm at it, I'd like to commend the cooperative efforts of law enforcement and health agencies at all levels which have been fighting a long, hard battle against the drug problem. And I also heartily applaud the education and prevention efforts, as I said before, of the parents' movement.
And for those who say that—first of all, that this benefits the rich, the overwhelming majority of parents or families with children in independent or parochial schools in America today have incomes of under $25,000. Forty percent of the students in the Catholic schools of Chicago are black. This whole measure is simply a recognition of the unfairness of people, who in an effort to—they hope to improve the education or get the kind of education that they particularly want for their children, are willing to pay the full burden of the taxes that support the public school system.
But these parents are willing to pay for one system of education by taxes that they do not use at all and then out of their own pockets pay for another system of education to educate their own children, which relieves some of the burden on the taxpayers. They don't impose on them. And I just think it's simple fairness to give them some kind of a break. And, as I say, the economics of it points out that this is benefiting those people at the lower and middle-income ranges.
Having mentioned education, may I digress for a moment. Recently a national convention having to do with education was held in California. A central theme at that gathering was an attack on our efforts to get control of runaway Federal spending and what a threat that was to education. They painted some pretty horrendous pictures—horrendous but untrue.
I have charged that the Federal Government in recent years has interfered unnecessarily in the classroom, claiming its right to do that by virtue of Federal financial aid to public schools. Well, that aid amounts to only 8.1 percent of the total cost of public school education. Local and State government put up the other 91.9 percent.
Yes, there will be savings, but not because we're depriving children of necessary educational programs. Many of the savings will be in the elimination of Federal administrative overhead and in giving local authorities more flexibility, free of useless regulations and red tape. And that, incidentally, is the underlying principle of federalism.
The recent summit at Versailles proved once again, as I told the British Parliament, that even in times of severe economic strain, free peoples can work together freely and voluntarily to address problems as serious as inflation, unemployment, trade, and economic development in a spirit of cooperation and solidarity. In our bilateral relationship as well, democratic principles are the foundation on which we can build the framework of a lasting and durable friendship. The day-to-day reality of our close ties, whether in the fields of education, the arts, science, or commerce, all flow from the same basic understanding that although our countries may travel separate paths from time to time, our destination remains the same.
That's why we support and endorse a program of tuition tax credits, so that our independent schools and our country as a whole will prosper. We need diversity and excellence. As economist Thomas Sowell has suggested, these tuition tax credits are especially important "to those who are mentioned the least: the poor and the working class." As the cost of education has skyrocketed, it is these groups that have been particularly hard hit by the double burden of supporting private and public schools.
And let me add here that far from being a threat to the public school system, these tax credits will serve only to raise the standards of the competing school systems. As a New York Times editorial pointed out recently, the mere threat of tax credits "served to jolt public education out of its lethargy. In New York and other places, public schools now show encouraging signs of improvement."
I understand that last March, after Secretary Schweiker and Congressman Gore kicked off this campaign, over 500,000 people received free health-care education and screening services. Now, this is the type of private sector initiative that Bill Verity and members of the Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives have been bringing to my attention all year.
But in this survey of 54 schools, they found 56 percent in these parochial schools of the student body were black; 31 percent of those were Protestant. Now, I know there are Protestant schools represented here as well as the Catholic schools. But what they also learned was—and the parents, incidentally, of most of these children, the overwhelming majority, are not anywhere up on the economic scale. As a matter of fact, the average tuition of those schools worked out to $300. That was a true hardship at the economic level of the parents who, wanting something better for their children, as parents have from time immemorial, and wanting the best education they could provide for them, were willing to sacrifice and pay a tuition to a private school because they no longer had confidence in the public schools in their areas, that they could get the training that they would need to advance. And they found that it was not religion that had prompted the overwhelming majority to choose a religious school, whether Protestant or Catholic; it was the desire and the belief that they would get a better education there than they could get in the present-day public schools.
Now, I'm a product of the public schools, myself, in a small town in Illinois. But I believe all of us are aware that there have been changes. I happen to believe that as long as there is independent education in this country, all the way from the lowest grade on up through college and university, then we have academic freedom. I would hate to see the day when all education in our country was tax-supported and, therefore, under political guidance and rule. And I think, also, the best chance to improve the quality of education—which on the record has very definitely established that in public schools, under whatever pressures or crowding or whatever, has slumped in comparison to the schools that we're talking about—the best chance we have of raising that level is through competition.
The President. Well, of course, public education is not a function of the Federal Government. There is financial aid in recent years to some of these schools. And, as a matter of fact, being able to remember when that began, it was the usual thing of the Federal Government claiming that there was distress after the Federal Government had usurped most of the tax sources in the country. And, having created the problem, then, for local rule, the Federal Government said, "Oh, we must help you." And in the beginning educators opposed that, because they thought that it would interfere with academic freedom. And the Federal Government insisted, "Oh, no." It just wanted to help them out financially.
If you look at some of the figures in the public school system in recent years, you will find that the Federal Government has more than matched its financial aid with interference in the running of schools. And I believe that this is what has led to the deterioration of quality; that the Federal Government has imposed out of all proportion—I think the Federal Government puts up about 8 percent of the cost of public education, but it interferes far more than 8 percent in the things that it imposes and demands of the public schools.
Finally, the emphasis on the directive I'm issuing today is, as I mentioned, channeling the power of the private sector into this area of concern. If you'll pardon these private thoughts, our goal is to get you through a particularly rough time—not only a time of economic uncertainty, also a time when you're reexamining your fundamental role in American education. We fully expect that as our program is successful, due to your efforts as well as ours, your operations will become self-sufficient. That's our ultimate goal, and I'm certain that it's yours as well.
Dr. William Harvey. Thank you very much, Mr. President. We appreciate your support for Hampton Institute as well as for all of black higher education.
Last year when you signed your Executive order, you instructed the Federal agencies to put more money into black higher education. And this has become a reality. Although spending was down for all of higher education, actually the black community-the black higher educational community received more money; as a matter of fact, about $3 million more than in the previous fiscal year. We thank you, Mr. President, for this support.
In addition to the enforcement element, our strategy will also focus on international cooperation, education, and prevention-which Nancy's very interested in—detoxification and treatment and research.
The President. And that's what the program is intended to do. Actually, in this thing—and we still have loan programs and grant programs to help students go through college, university, and so forth. And much of the talk that we somehow have withdrawn from that program is just not true. What we did find out was that a lot of people whose family income was such that they couldn't really justify the need of this help—we have aimed the programs at people of lower income families who must have that help if they're to get an education. And we have put some restraints and restrictions on people whose income level or family income level was higher.
I was impressed most, though, by the bright prospects for the future. Great advances were made over the previous two decades in economic growth, in developing and diversifying industrial and agricultural production, improving health services and education. I'm convinced that the hemisphere will continue this trend of strong growth and improvement.
Someone has remarked, the comfort of having a friend may be taken away but not that of having had a friend. Well, America may have lost the comfort and courage of Dr. King's presence, but we've not really lost him. Every time a black woman casts a ballot, Martin King is there. Every time a black man is hired for a good job, Dr. King is there. Every time a black child receives a sound education, Dr. King is there. Every time a black person is elected to public office, Dr. King is there. Every time black and white Americans work side by side for a better future, Dr. King is there. He's with us, and with us very much today.
This campaign has already received a half a million dollars in donations and grants, and we're ready to get rolling. But we still have a roof that leaks. [Laughter] More importantly, we have students who need financial aid, which means that we need more support. We need support from individuals; we need support from corporations; we need support from people that care-that have a care about whether American education is in the future of places like this private initiative high school.
Ms. Smith. Yes. I'm so excited about the dynamic leadership that is exemplified in our principal, Paul Adams, and the really primary example of breaking the cycle of poverty that he has developed here at Providence-St. Mel that I wish, Mr. President, that we could find a way of taking it across the country. All the technical training in the world doesn't do any good if the other parts of a well-rounded education aren't taken into account. And the discipline and drive and high moral standards that Principal Adams has set up in this school are what make the total student and what is responsible, in my opinion, for making these students such exciting examples of what our American youth can be.
You know, being in the job I am, you get some complaints sometimes from people out in the country, and some that have to do with education and just feel that the problems are so big for them. And they want to know if the government can't think of a way to help. Well, I think sometimes the government is the problem, not the answer. And you've done it the other way.
Maybe we should have a government program in which people who call in and want to know what they can do to solve some terrible problem in their education system is send them a round-trip to Chicago and the address of Providence-St. Mel—and let them come here and find out. [Laughter]
We Americans are still the technological leaders in most fields. We must keep that edge, and to do so we need to begin renewing the basics—starting with our educational system. While we grew complacent, others have acted. Japan, with a population only about half the size of ours, graduates from its universities more engineers than we do. If a child doesn't receive adequate math and science teaching by the age of 16, he or she has lost the chance to be a scientist or an engineer. We must join together-parents, teachers, grass roots groups, organized labor, and the business community-to revitalize American education by setting a standard of excellence.
In 1983 we seek four major education goals: a quality education initiative to encourage a substantial upgrading of math and science instruction through block grants to the States; establishment of education savings accounts that will give middle and lower-income families an incentive to save for their children's college education and, at the same time, encourage a real increase in savings for economic growth; passage of tuition tax credits for parents who want to send their children to private or religiously affiliated schools; a constitutional amendment to permit voluntary school prayer. God should never have been expelled from America's classrooms in the first place.
Over the past year, our Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives has successfully forged a working partnership involving leaders of business, labor, education, and government to address the training needs of American workers. Thanks to the Task Force, private sector initiatives are now underway in all 50 States of the Union, and thousands of working people have been helped in making the shift from dead-end jobs and low-demand skills to the growth areas of high technology and the service economy. Additionally, a major effort will be focused on encouraging the expansion of private community child care. The new advisory council on private sector initiatives will carry on and extend this vital work of encouraging private initiative in 1983.
No, and I've been most interested in some of the things that were said here and—because of the problems that you mentioned—when you mentioned in education and in the tax structure.
The educational subject that you brought up there and about the higher education, I'm wondering, again, and how do we get at this problem of whether we're getting all that the dollars invested should buy? Because with inflation down to 3.9 percent in 1982, we found there were two areas—one we know of is health care, that was up several times as high in its inflation rate as the national average. Second to it was education, which was increasing in cost in 1982 at somewhere in excess well between 8 and 9 percent, not the 3.9 or even holding down there.
And here again, I wonder—particularly in those tax-supported institutions and those that have government help—have we done the same thing there that we've done to some individuals? Have we become—it's so easy, be dependent on government that business practices that would be absolute imperatives in your own businesses are no longer applying, for example, in that field, to education.
I'm accused of telling anecdotes and so forth, but let me just give one example. While I was Governor of California, I visited a State-supported institution, higher education. It was up in the north of our State in what you would expect that a school of forestry and engineering and so forth would be the principal functions there. But having been in the business I'd been in before I was Governor, I was proudly shown through their theater arts department. And I was shown their TV studios. They even had a revolving stage so that they could have movable sets and so forth and a shop for building them and a complete theater. And I couldn't resist. I finally said to the man in charge who was so proud of this, I said, "May I tell you that if any of your graduates ever make it big in show business, Broadway, Hollywood, television, they will never again perform in facilities equal to those that you've given them to learn in." [Laughter]
Mr. Cullinane. John Cullinane, Cullinane Database Systems. Mr. President, I was recently asked to chair a committee in behalf of the Massachusetts High Technology Council on computer literacy, kindergarten through the 12th grade. And more recently, I was asked to chair the advisory committee for Northeastern University's new college of computer sciences. So, many of us were quite interested in your comments last night about tax incentives or other incentives to parents and the average American in terms of, related to the cost of education and what could be done in that area.
The President. Well, we are exploring what we can do to make it possible for more families to contribute to the educational costs. If you look back at the history of the Government getting involved in everything from the work-study program to student loans to guaranteed loans to the outright Pell Grants and so forth—and I know that we've been assailed as trying to cut back on that and in this way we're trying to deprive people that wouldn't otherwise get an education. No, what we were trying to do in whatever cutbacks we made was to see that the money was directed to those people whose family incomes were such that very obviously they could not get higher education without some kind of help.
But we are studying right now programs that will make it more possible for the family to help. I mentioned one last night. Monday is when we will disclose the budget and what it is that we are proposing. But we do have in mind a program, a savings program in which there will be a tax incentive for people to start saving for their children's eventual college education, try and induce them to do that. That, at the same time, will, of course, aid in our amassing of capital, because that money will then be available for investment and so forth as it's put into the savings accounts. We want very much to see that happen.
In connection with this and your remarks about education, I note that all of this and the fine help that you've been given is directed toward higher education. Are we ignoring a problem down at basic education that is a part of our problem, that we have seen it in our military forces. We've seen the high—well, as a mother put it to me one day in a meeting that I had with a group of parents, and she said to me, "Don't talk about busing my child to a school or anything else." She said, "I want my child kept in the class he's in until he learns what he's supposed to have learned in that class, not graduated from that class and pushed into another one because he'd simply come to the end of the term." Now, there's a lot of that going on also in education today.
To get back to the very beginning and a mention that had to do with the tax structure of our country—I realize that there will be a great stirring, and I'll probably kick myself for having said this. But when are we all going to have the courage to point out that, in our tax structure, the corporate tax is very hard to justify its existence; that why isn't the so-called corporate tax simply passed on to the stockholders in which they then, based on whatever bracket they're in, will pay in individual income tax? And won't this do something about that educational map that we saw up there?
The endowments of institutions—I saw how very slim that one up there was for how much those institutions, higher education gets from endowment. But those are supposed to be tax-free institutions. And much of their endowment is invested out there in industrial America. But if they're tax free, aren't they paying a 46-percent tax rate before they get the results, the dividends that they get from the holdings that they have? And, thus, wouldn't it be more fair to them, wouldn't it be more fair to the labor union pension funds invested in that same industry if they got, as dividends—and they wouldn't have to pay tax on it because they are tax free. But other individuals, it wouldn't be a loss to the Government. I think there would be a net gain to the Government all the way around if we would look at that instead of sticking with what is literally a myth about corporations and what the taxing policy should be. [Applause]
You know, we were frustrated on two other fronts last year. There are 5 million American children attending private schools today because of emphasis on religious values and educational standards. Their families, most of whom earn less than $25,000 a year, pay private tuition, and they also pay their full share of taxes to fund the public schools. We think they're entitled to relief. So, I want you to know that shortly, we'll be sending legislation back up to the Hill, and we will begin the struggle all over again to secure tuition tax credits for deserving families.
That's what's happening with CBN and the 700 Club's "Operation Blessing." They've given nearly $2 1/2 million to more than 8,500 churches, and this money is then matched by the local churches. The result has been fantastic: More than 100,000 needy families helped, either through direct or in-kind contributions, ranging from food and clothing to education, dental care, and housework,
In totalitarian societies, and particularly the Soviet Union, Jews face even greater adversity. Despite the rights enumerated in the Soviet Constitution and in the Helsinki agreements, Soviet Jews are denied basic rights to study and practice their religion, to secure higher education and good jobs, or to emigrate freely. Heroic men and women like Anatoly Shcharanskiy, who openly proclaim their Jewish pride and desire to emigrate, are subjected to brutal harassment and imprisonment. But, just as Soviet Jews will not forget their own heritage nor abandon hope for freedom, we will not forget them. We will not, as the Western democracies did 4 days [decades] ago, turn a deaf ear to distant pleas for help.
And this is not a new revolution or revelation. Back in 1969, as the Governor of California, I commissioned a task force on aerospace aviation education so that our young citizens could be prepared for future opportunities in this field. In a program similar to this, and consistent with the thrust of my State of the Union message, Lynn Helms over at the Federal Aviation Administration tells me he's embarking on a new initiative, an aviation education program that will help our students make sure that when the future gets here, they'll be ready for it.
I urge you, as leaders of the private sector, to join us in our campaign to forge a working partnership for recovery between business, labor, education, and government. Already, such a partnership is addressing the training needs of American workers. With the help of our Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives, thousands of working people at the community level have already made the shift from dead-end jobs and low-demand skills to the growth areas of high technology and the service economy.
The Young Presidents Organization is an international education association limited to chief executives of corporations who reached their positions before the age of 40.
On another front, all of you know how vitally important it is for us to reverse the decline in American education, to take responsibility for the education of our children out of the hands of the bureaucrats and put it back in the hands of parents and teachers. That's why the Congress must stop dithering. We need those tuition tax credits. We need a voucher system for the parents of disadvantaged children. We need education savings accounts, a sort of IRA for college. And finally—and don't think for a moment I've given up—we need to eliminate that unnecessary and politically engendered Department of Education.
But whether it's cutting spending and taxing, shrinking the size of the deficit, ending overregulation, inefficiency, fraud, and waste in government, cracking down on career criminals, revitalizing American education, pressing for prayer and abortion legislation, I think you can see that the agenda we've put before America these past 2 years has been a conservative one. Oh, and there are two other matters that I think you'd be interested in. First, as part of our federalism effort, next week we will be sending to the Congress our proposal for four megablock grants that will return vital prerogatives to the States where they belong. And second, the Office of Management and Budget will press ahead with new regulations prohibiting the use of Federal tax dollars for purposes of political advocacy.
As the president of one of our country's greatest institutions of higher learning, and as an outstanding black American scholar, James Cheek embodies the spirit of excellence in education. Dr. Cheek's distinguished career and community work are impressive testimony to his commitment to his calling and his country. His efforts have helped to build a better life for black Americans and a better country for us all.
And in addition, while I was Governor, once he wrote a speech for me to give at a very distinguished educational gathering that quieted all charges that I was not of an intellectual capacity. [Laughter] And Jacob K. Javits:2
But here's what we've done at the Federal Government level. It isn't a case of cutting back the aid. But we found out that the programs had expanded to the point that people, families with incomes enough that they should be able to provide the education themselves for their children, were still getting this government aid and the government guaranteed loans and so forth. We changed the standards to make it possible to give more of that aid to those whose financial standing or earnings were such that they couldn't go without it.
Government has done a lot of things now and in its aid to education and all that has, in effect, kind of moved to take some of what should be parental duties away from the parents now and have you beholden to government. And I just don't think—government can be a lot of things, but it can't be mama and papa and it shouldn't try.
The participants in the session were part of the Close-Up Foundation program, a nonpartisan educational foundation providing secondary school students the opportunity to study the American political system.
But those of my generation, and now I have to say and of your parents' generation, cannot just assume that you will adapt to the future. We must conscientiously prepare you for the years ahead. We must provide you with a good education, with solid math and science instruction. Not only will math and science serve you well in meeting the future, it'll serve the Nation.
The relatively short supply of technically qualified people in the United States is not because we don't have enough students, men or women, interested in tomorrow's job opportunities. In fact, engineering schools have to turn away many qualified students. The principal reason is the shortage of engineering faculty in universities and qualified math and science teachers in the secondary schools. This shortage cannot continue. And I know you'll be happy to hear that we intend to improve the quality of math and science education. And right now we're working with the Congress to determine the funding necessary to begin reducing this shortage. We seek a fiscally responsible initiative in this area—fair not only to your educational future but your economic future, as well.
After the presentation, the President visited with students participating in the World Showcase Fellowship Program, an educational and cultural exchange program designed to enable outstanding young adults to represent their various countries for 1 year in the pavilions of World Showcase. The fellowship program is part of the President's private sector initiative on international youth exchange.
I'd like to talk to you today about one of the most important issues that touches our lives and shapes our future: the education of America's children. We've always had a love affair with learning in this country. America is a melting pot, and education has been a mainspring for our democracy and freedom, a means of providing gifts of knowledge and opportunity to all citizens, no matter how humble their background, so they could climb higher, help build the American dream, and leave a better life for those who follow.
Broad educational opportunity not only secured our role as the pathbreaker to progress, it also protected and strengthened our freedom. We were wise enough to heed Thomas Jefferson's warning that "any nation which expects to be ignorant and free expects what never was and never will be."
But in recent years, our traditions of opportunity and excellence in education have been under siege. We've witnessed the growth of a huge education bureaucracy. Parents have often been reduced to the role of outsiders. Government-manufactured inflation made private schools and higher education too expensive for too many families. Even God, source of all knowledge, was expelled from classrooms.
It's time to face the truth. Advocates of more and more government interference in education have had ample time to make their case, and they've failed. Look at the record. Federal spending on education soared eightfold in the last 20 years, rising much faster than inflation. But during the same period, scholastic aptitude test scores went down, down, and down.
But better education doesn't mean a bigger Department of Education. In fact, that Department should be abolished. Instead, we must do a better job teaching the basics, insisting on discipline and results, encouraging competition and, above all, remembering that education does not begin with Washington officials or even State and local officials. It begins in the home, where it is the right and responsibility of every American.
Our administration has put together an education package that addresses the challenge of restoring opportunity to families and excellence in our schools. It contains several proposals to help parents reestablish control and to assist them in meeting education costs.
Second, we're proposing a voucher system to help parents of disadvantaged children. We want to give States or individual school districts the option of using certain Federal education funds to create vouchers so these parents can choose which school, private or public, they want their children to attend.
Third, we're proposing a system of educational savings accounts to help families save for college education. Parents will be able to save up to $1,000 per year, per child, with no tax on the interest.
These proposals will expand opportunities by allowing parents to keep more of their own money, rather than taxing it away to finance bigger bureaucracies. They will also increase healthy competition among schools. Without a race, there can be no champion, no records broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.
Private sector initiatives can also make great contributions. We're encouraging corporations, community organizations, and neighborhood groups across the country to adopt schools and help them meet their education needs with funds, equipment, and personnel.
Just as we're now seeing a healthy revival of our national economy, we can improve America's educational system and make it the best in the world again. But we must not delay. I hope we'll have your support and the cooperation of the Congress.
How can those who talk so much about fairness and compassion turn around and take away the third year of your tax cut and the indexing? How can they justify hitting the median-income family with a $3,550 tax increase over the next 5 years? How can they pretend to help you cope with your bills, put money aside for education, and save for your retirement when they're reaching deeper and deeper into your pockets?
But I'm glad to see so many of you here. I recall that when I last spoke to you, just about a year ago at the meeting in Chicago, my advance people—on the other hand-call what I'm doing here today as a "dropby." [Laughter] Now, that means I don't have much time. [Laughter] So, let me get to the heart of what I know the National Catholic Educational Association is interested in—the education of our children.
Since time is short, I'll jump right to the educational package that our administration has put together. I believe it addresses the challenge of restoring opportunity to our children and excellence in our schools. And first—and our first piece of legislation—we need tuition tax credits.
Now, some educational lobbies have protested that this is an attack on the public schools for the benefit of students attending-well, they usually point to exclusive finishing or prep schools. And I'd be willing to bet that you didn't think your children were in such schools. [Laughter]
We're also proposing a voucher system to help parents of disadvantaged children. We want to give the States or individual school districts the option of using certain Federal educational funds to create vouchers so that those parents can choose which school, private or public, they want their children to attend. If anyone realizes the need for free parental choice, it is the Catholic community. This measure is designed to give the disadvantaged people a choice. They want it, they deserve it, and with your help, they'll get that choice.
Now let me mention one more aspect of our package. We're proposing a system of educational savings accounts to help families save for their children's college education. Parents will be able to save—what we're proposing is $1,000 per year per child with no tax on the interest. And when the money is finally withdrawn, it must be for the purpose of sending a child to college.
Now, I believe these proposals will expand the opportunities for our children. It will also increase healthy competition among schools. At any time that we ever settle for a monopoly on education, then we settle for the evils that go with a monopoly. And certainly that does not include academic freedom. In the long run, what we're proposing means a better and more diverse educational system for all of our children, and that's why I wanted to come over here today and tell you about it.
Your Majesty, the American people are deeply impressed by what you've achieved. Since you assumed leadership, your country's progress-economically, socially, and politically—has established your reputation as a compassionate leader who can get things done. In an inspiring commitment to the long-run interest of your people, you've built a modern education system of which any country would be proud. Similarly, the level of health care available to your people is testimony to the humane character and businesslike efficiency of your leadership, and your building the infrastructure of a modern economy, fulfilling the prerequisites for progress for your people.
In my welcoming remarks this morning, I touched on a few of your many wonderful accomplishments. These were not products of a faint heart or indecision. Modern education systems, sophisticated health organizations, the infrastructure for economic progress don't just spring into existence, especially in so short a time. These advances are the result of hard work and good government. They reflect on extraordinary level of leadership; they reflect values which are deeply cherished here and reaffirm our high regard for the people of Oman and for you as an individual.
The President. Well, yes, we've talked about that, but providing there would not be any increase in Federal administration of those funds. We think there is a parallel between the Federal involvement in education and the decline in quality over recent years. What is more needed than just throwing money at education—we're right now spending more money than any other country in the world; we're spending $215 billion on education in this country. We think what has happened is—well, the report speaks for itself, that we have let up, we are not actually taking the students to the limit of their ability. We think we need more required courses. This is what the Commission has come up with.
And I know that today a question was asked of David Gardner as to the one thing that was lacking in the report was the demand for a big Federal program. I thought his answer explained it very well when he said, "No, we are trying to improve the quality of education, and that doesn't take a big Federal program."
When Secretary Bell and I first discussed a plan of action to deal with the declining quality of education in America, we agreed that it was imperative to assemble a panel of America's leading educators, an assembly of such eminence that the Nation would listen to its findings. Well, today you've issued your report. And I'm confident that America's students, parents, teachers, and government officials will join me in listening closely to your findings and recommendations.
Your Commission was asked to assess the quality of teaching and learning in America compared with our own educational tradition and the rising competition from other industrial nations. You've taken a long, hard look at America's educational system and found that quality is lacking, but not because today's students are any less capable than their predecessors. You've found that our educational system is in the grip of a crisis caused by low standards, lack of purpose, ineffective use of resources, and a failure to challenge students to push performance to the boundaries of individual ability—and that is to strive for excellence.
When I first addressed this Commission at its inaugural meeting in October of 1981, I pointed out that there are few areas of American life as important to our society, to our people and our parents and families as our schools and colleges. And I also noted a parallel between a decline in our education and a decline—or our economy, I should say, and a decline in education. In both cases, serious problems had grown worse because of neglect and because too many people viewed the world the way they wanted it to be rather than the way it really is.
Well, we described our economy in realistic terms; we passed overdue reforms; and now the economy's growing again,. but without double-digit inflation and record interest rates like before. Today we're calling attention to the way things really are in education. And this year our country will spend $215 billion for education. We spent more on education at all levels than any other country in the world. But what have we bought with all that spending?
I was interested to see that you noted the almost uninterrupted decline in student achievement in the scores during the past two decades, decades in which the Federal presence in education grew and grew. Today's high school graduates score almost 40 points below their 1963 counterparts on standard mathematic tests and 50 points lower on verbal tests. Last year's gain on SAT scores will have to be repeated for more than a decade before we achieve the levels of the mid-sixties again.
Your Commission notes that our education policies have squandered the gains of the sputnik area. The statistics I just cited underscore the decline in student achievement. Other indicators are more alarming.
About 13 percent of our 17-year-olds are considered functionally illiterate, and for minority youth, the figure may be as high as 40 percent. In our public 4-year colleges, remedial math courses now compromise-or comprise, I should say—"compromise" is on my mind; that was a Freudian slip. [Laughter] They now comprise one-fourth of all the math courses that are taught in our colleges. We can no longer afford to pass students who fail to learn from one grade to the next simply because they've come to the end of the year. We can't afford to waste the valuable resources of higher education to remedy problems that were ignored in our elementary and high schools. Four-fifths of our 17-year-olds can't write a persuasive essay. Two-thirds can't solve mathematical problems involving more than one step. And nearly 40 percent can't draw inferences from reading.
Despite record levels of educational spending, America's students came in last in 7 of 19 academic tests compared to students of other industrialized nations. We never placed first or second. More than half of our country's gifted and talented students failed to match performance with their tested ability.
Thomas Jefferson warned us, "If a nation expects to be ignorant and free, it expects what never was and never will be." It's not too much to say that what began as our unique vision—human progress through individual opportunity—will grind to a halt in America if we fail to meet our educational challenges in the eighties. I welcome your challenge to the parents of America to hold elected officials responsible for carrying out those reforms.
Your report emphasizes that the Federal role in education should be limited to specific areas, and any assistance should be provided with a minimum of administrative burdens on our schools, colleges, and teachers.
Your call for an end to Federal intrusion is consistent with our task of redefining the Federal role in education. I believe that parents, not government, have the primary responsibility for the education of their children. Parental authority is not a right conveyed by the state; rather, parents delegate to their elected school board representatives and State legislators the responsibility for their children's schooling.
In a 1982 Gallup poll, the majority of those surveyed thought Washington should exert less influence in determining the educational program of the public schools. So, we'll continue to work in the months ahead for passage of tuition tax credits, vouchers, educational savings accounts, voluntary school prayer, and abolishing the Department of Education. Our agenda is to restore quality to education by increasing competition and by strengthening parental choice and local control. I'd like to ask all of you, as well as every citizen who considers this report's recommendations, to work together to restore excellence in America's schools.
We're entering a new era, and education holds the key. As sunrise industries grow, they bring us technological advances, offering opportunities and challenges. Bather than fear our future, let us embrace it and make it work for us by improving instruction in science and math, retraining our workers, encouraging the continued education, retooling our factories, and stimulating investment in new areas of growth. We can do that. We can compete and meet the challenges of the marketplace. We're still the world's technological leader. But to be stronger, we have to get smarter.
America needs more education power. I would like to close today by commending Ted Bell for his leadership in creating the Commission and by thanking each of the members, especially Dr. David Gardner, the able Chairman, and Vice-Chairman, Yvonne Larsen, for their dedicated effort. You've rendered the Nation a valuable service. And on behalf of all concerned with excellence in education, I want to thank you for your work, your courage, and your vision.
My fellow Americans:
I'd like to talk with you today about a subject of paramount concern to every American family—the education of our children. You may have heard the disturbing report this week by the National Commission on Excellence in Education that I created shortly after taking office. Their study reveals that our education system, once the finest in the world, is in a sorry state of disrepair.
Parents who never finished high school scrimp and save so that their children can go to college. Yet today, we're told in a tough report card on our commitment that the educational skills of today's students will not match those of their parents. About 13 percent of our 17-year-olds are functional illiterates and, among minority youth, the rate is closer to 40 percent. More than twothirds of our high schoolers can't write a decent essay. Our grade is a stark and uncompromising "U" for unsatisfactory. We must act now and with energy if we're to avoid failing an entire generation.
Let me hasten to point out that America's children are just as smart today as they ever were. But most of them do less than an hour of homework a night. Many have abandoned vocational and college prep courses for general ones. When they graduate from high school, they're prepared for neither work nor higher education.
The study indicates the quality of learning in our classrooms has been declining for the last two decades—a fact which won't surprise many parents or the students educated during that period. Those were years when the Federal presence in education grew and grew. Parental control over local schools shrank. Bureaucracy ballooned until accountability seemed lost. Parents were frustrated and didn't know where to turn.
Well, government seemed to forget that education begins in the home, where it's a parental right and responsibility. Both our private and our public schools exist to aid your families in the instruction of your children. For too many years, people here in Washington acted like your families' wishes were only getting in the way. We've seen what that "Washington knows best" attitude has wrought.
Our high standards of literacy and educational diversity have been slipping. Well-intentioned but misguided policymakers have stamped a uniform mediocrity on the rich variety and excellence that had been our heritage.
I think most parents agree it's time to change course. We must move education forward again, with common sense as our guide. We must put the basics back in the schools and the parents back in charge.
Parents, please demand these and other reforms in your local schools and hold your local officials accountable. Let our parents once again be the rudder that puts American education back on course towards success through excellence.
There are things the Federal Government can and must do to ensure educational excellence, but bigger budgets are not the answer. Federal spending increased seventeen-fold during the same 20 years that marked such a dramatic decline in quality. We will continue our firm commitment to support the education efforts of State and local governments, but the focus of our agenda is, as it must be, to restore parental choice and influence and to increase competition between schools.
We've sent to the Congress a tuition tax credit plan and proposed a voucher system to help low- and middle-income families afford the schools of their choice. We've proposed education savings accounts to help families save for college education. We've sent legislation to the Congress that would create block grants for the training of math and science teachers, and another proposal would encourage those teachers to keep abreast of new developments in their fields. We've also begun an effort to honor some of our finest math and science teachers.
For the sake of all our children, our country, and our future, we must join together in a national campaign to restore excellence in American education. At home, in school, in State government, and at the Federal level, we must make sure we have put our children first and that their education is a top priority.
I would like to close with a special challenge to America's students who may think I just want to pile on more homework. Your generation is coming of age in one of the most challenging and exciting times in our history. High technology is revolutionizing our industries, renewing our economy, and promising new hope and opportunity in the years ahead. But you must earn the rewards of the future with plain hard work. The harder you work today, the greater your rewards will be tomorrow. Make sure you get the training and the skills you need to take advantage of the new opportunities ahead. Get a good education; that's the key to success. It will open your mind and give wings to your spirit. There's a dazzling new world waiting for you. My generation only discovered it. But you, by summoning all the faith, effort, and discipline you can muster can claim it for America.
This past year alone, American hunters have paid more than $107 million toward these conservation efforts. The money will fund important studies of game and their habitat. It'll provide food and habitat projects for wildlife. And portions will go for hunter safety and education courses where our youngsters will be taught marksmanship, firearms safety, and some of the values and ethics of hunting and the outdoors. I deeply appreciate your contributions to preserving our national treasures for the benefit of our people and future generations.
Increasingly, we see evidence that the ideas and vision of our party which we brought to Washington are shared by the great majority of our citizens. During the years when Federal spending on education grew and grew, and the government elbowed aside the traditional role of parents, we saw the SAT scores steadily decline. We said the answer was not Washington knows best, but a return to the basics: more competition, more emphasis on high standards, quality instruction, student discipline, and a restoration of parental involvement and local control. Now, after 18 months of preparation, a blue-ribbon commission on excellence in education has issued a report that says exactly what we had been saying.
The President. Not really, because, you see, education is not the prime responsibility of the Federal Government, and the total budget for education in the United States is far greater than the defense budget. As a matter of fact, the Federal Government actually provides less than 10 percent of the cost of education through the Department of Education.
Now, we've gone through a period of a number of years, about 10 years, in which we went from $760 million Federal aid to education to about $14.9 billion, and that's a 2,000-percent increase. And it was during that period that the testing scores—the college testing, entrance tests, and so forth-began to decline so severely.
Now, I appointed a Commission to study and bring back a report on what we felt was a decline in education in our schools. They brought back a masterful report. And in that report there's very little suggestion for more money. What they're talking about can be corrected without money. It takes some leadership. It takes some return to basics. It takes having students that now have to learn what they're supposed to learn in a class before they're moved on to the next class, just because they've come to the end of the year. And there's an awful lot of that goes on.
We think there's some common sense that is needed. And so we've proven that money, throwing money at it isn't the answer. And the Federal Government can never match the funding of schools at the local and State level, where we've created the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and then have let it deteriorate. And I think you can make a case that it began to deteriorate when the Federal Government started interfering in education.
The President. Well, I don't know that so many of those things—there would be some increase in money there, I'm quite sure. But again, how much is being wasted on some things that aren't contributing to their education that could be transferred to that? And I think that—well, right now there are three—Time magazine, just a few days ago, had an article in there about three inner-city high schools: one in the Bronx, New York, one in Los Angeles, one in Austin, Texas. And just by changes from the principal's office down, in leadership, these schools have become what schools are supposed to be, to the extent that students are leaving private schools to transfer to these public schools.
And I want to implement as completely as possible that plan that was submitted to us by this Commission that was investigating education. And it won't cost $11 billion, which a nameless gentleman has suggested he would advocate that we spend. [Laughter]
Mr. President, it is my sense that the people of EPA who have stayed with it from the beginning are there because of their belief in the fundamental importance of their mission. EPA was not created to deal with the usual mix of social problems, whether they be poverty, jobs, housing, education, crime. In a real sense, EPA's mission transcends all of these. That mission is the preservation of life itself. The career people of EPA recognize better than the rest of us the necessity of harmonizing their mission with the essentials of the life they're trying to preserve. They know the single-minded pursuit of any social goal to the exclusion of all others can cause severe societal distortions. They are willing and uniquely able to help our country avoid those distortions if so charged.
What kind of a world is it that you face now, on the brink of a new chapter in your lives; and what kind of a world will your children, in their time, face? Someone once said of our country that "We soared into the 20th century on the wings of invention and the winds of change." Well, in a few years' time, we Americans will soar into the 21st century, and again it will be on the wings of invention and the winds of change. And you will have been responsible for much of that change. In large measure, the quality of your individual lives, and your children's lives, will be determined by the quality of the education that you've received—at home and at school—to prepare you for this new world of challenge, innovation, and opportunity.
But for you to take advantage of all these awesome new advances—and for your children to—we must forge an education system capable of meeting the demands of change. And the sad fact is that, today, such a system does not exist in its entirety. Oh, there are plenty of outstanding schools-present company included—and thousands of dedicated teachers and school administrators. But, taken as a whole, we have to feel that many of our high schools are not doing the job they should.
Right about now, I expect some of you are saying to yourselves, "Well, that's what I would expect to hear from a fellow like that. He's a conservative." But don't take my word for it. Listen to what a former Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare—a card-carrying liberal, Joseph Califano, who served under my immediate predecessor, had to say on the subject. He said, "I came to HEW enthusiastic about the opportunity to improve education in America, and determined to step up Federal funding sharply." And then he wrote, "I left alarmed over the deterioration of public education in America and troubled by the threat to academic freedom that the Federal role, enlarged and shaped by special interests, poses."
Well, I couldn't agree more. And I know that former Secretary Califano also spoke for thousands of parents, teachers, students, and school administrators who have found themselves caught in a tangle of conflicting, time-consuming Federal regulations. The road to better education for all our people simply cannot be paved with more and more recycled tax dollars collected, redistributed, and overregulated by Washington bureaucrats.
But there is much that the Federal Government can do to help set a national agenda for excellence in education, a commitment to quality that can open up new opportunities and new horizons to our young people. I'll have a little more to say about that in the weeks ahead. But on this special day, let me just cite a few commonsense goals and guiding principles. Some of them may be familiar to you. They should be, because they've helped to make the teaching that many of you have received here at Seton Hall and in your primary and secondary schools outstanding. And they can make the teaching your younger brothers and sisters and your children receive even better.
To begin with, the time has come for a grass roots campaign for educational renewal that unites parents, teachers, and concerned citizens. We spend more money per child for education than any other country in the world. We just haven't been getting our money's worth. And we won't until we reverse some of the dangerous trends of recent years. And that means restoring parents and local government to their rightful role in the educational process.
Perhaps the biggest irony about the problems facing American education today is the fact that we already know what makes for good schools—leadership from principals and superintendents, dedication from well-trained teachers, discipline, homework, testing, and efficient use of time. [Applause] I noted where that applause started from. [Laughter] All of these things can be improved without increasing Federal funding and interference—and with only modest increases in local and State support.
One of the best ways to do this—and, unfortunately, it's opposed by some of the heaviest hitters in the national education lobby—is by rewarding excellence. Teachers should be paid and promoted on the basis of their merit and competence. Hard-earned tax dollars should encourage the best. They have no business rewarding incompetence and mediocrity.
And we can also encourage excellence by encouraging parental choice. And that's exactly what we're trying to do through our programs of tuition tax credits and vouchers, allowing individual parents to choose the kinds of schools they know will be best for their children's needs. America rose to greatness through the free and vigorous competition of ideas. We can make American education great again by applying these same principles of intellectual freedom and innovation—for individual families, through the vouchers I mentioned and tuition tax credits, and for individual public school systems, through block grants that come without the red tape of government regulations from Washington attached.
You know we've had a commission studying the educational system, and they have just come in with their report. And it's an alarming report about overall education.
One of the figures in this report indicates that, compared to the students of other nations, on the average, we are way below the students of those other nations. But applying directly to you here, who are the leaders, the top 9 percent of American students rank equal to or above the top 9 percent in all those other countries. It is only the overall average that reflects what we think has been a decline in education. And you're in that top 9 percent.
And I would say that you—and I know that most of you will probably continue your education on, but those who don't, there is a great opportunity now to take training for jobs in these new upcoming and growing industries. And back there in that period so long ago in which I kind of ignored the number of years, it happened to me. There was a brand new industry then called radio. And I made up my mind that's what I wanted to be, and that's where I started my career and wound up broadcasting major league baseball and big-time football and so forth. But it was a brand new industry, and brand new industries like that are seeking young people that they can bring them in, in the ground floor, and train them and bring them up believing in the future of their industry.
The President. Well, in the first place, there haven't been cutbacks in funding for public education. This year it will be a total spent on education is $116.9 billion, and that's 7 percent more than last year. And that's double what was spent just 10 years ago on education.
An important part of that effort is our determination to restore the quality of America's education system. It was once the finest in the world, and we will not rest until it is so again. We will set a national agenda for excellence in education—an agenda that will reach every child in our land.
We intend to put the basics back in school and the parents back in charge. We believe teachers should be paid and promoted on the basis of their merit and competence, and that competition will promote better schools—that's why we've proposed tuition tax credits and vouchers to restore parental choice. We need you to join with us in a national campaign for excellence in American education. At home, in school, in State government, and at the Federal level, we must make sure we have put our children first and that their education is a top priority.
The President. Well, the Commission report also made it plain that just throwing money at it isn't the answer. Right now, the highest tax finance program in the United States is public education—some $215 billion. And incidentally, it has increased over the last 20 years, when everyone is so concerned about the decline in education, funding for education has increased by 600 percent. And in that some period, allowing for inflation in constant dollars, we have added a $66 billion increase in constant dollars over that same period in the per capita cost for each student.
So, I don't think that money is the problem. But what is necessary is to work out Federal, State, and local, and what are the proper functions for each to perform in education, and then have the responsibility of funding those.
Now education is basically a local and State function—always has been and always should be. At this moment, the Federal Government only supplies 8 percent of the total educational budget, and yet, one of the problems has been that over the years the Federal Government for that 8 percent has wanted about 50 percent of the control of the schools.
The President. Well, first of all, this whole question of cost in education, and I think there's a lot of misunderstanding about it—I recognize it would cost more for this. At the same time, I believe that if such a plan is instituted, then in budgeting you take care of that and, at the same time, possibly see whether there are other things of much lower priority.
There is one thing that I think I should take advantage of you, and call attention to this fact—that in the last 20 years, spending on education in this country has gone up 600 percent. Now, many could say, "Well, that was because of 20 years of continued inflation." But look at it in constant dollars. In that same period of time, the per-pupil cost in education—in constant dollars, allowing for inflation—has nearly doubled. And in that same period of time, we know, are when the problems have arisen that are confronting us. So, you have to say, "Is just purely money an answer, or don't we have to look deeper for some of the answers to the problems we have in education?"
I know that it can be done, and I know this comes down to always the view is, "Well, Federal Government." The amount of money in education today, incidentally-with regard to the reaction to a previous statement—is that in 1982 the total budget for national defense was $179 billion. It was 215 billion for education. And I don't fault that at all. Education is truly important and as important to our national security as defense. But we can't neglect either one of them.
But I think that the whole question of school funding comes down to one of laying out the layers of government. We built the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and we built it at the local school level—local, the State, and the Federal Government. And right now, they've been lined up vertically. And it's local and State, and then on top is the Federal Government, which only provides 8 percent of the educational budget, but which has, kind of, grabbed off about 50 percent of trying to regulate the schools.
The President. But I think that then you work out in this the—I said that we were vertical; we ought to be horizontal. We should be looking at what properly belongs for decision at the local level, what is the proper place for the State, and what is the proper place for the Federal Government-its interest in education and its responsibility-and look at them in that way; and then, proportionately to their responsibilities, expect the support of schools to be laid out in that same way.
Secretary Bell I'm very grateful that we have education now up where it's high on the education agenda of this country. It certainly has occupied a great deal of nationwide importance. And we're grateful to you, and those in the discussions today Mr. President, express their appreciation for the fact that we do have education now such a high priority. And I know it's because you've participated in events like this one, and we appreciate that. Well, those are the—
The President. Could I just—
Secretary Bell Yes.
The President. Could I just ask you—
Secretary Bell. Yes.
At the higher education level, it's done routinely. We have assistant professors, associate professors, full professors. We have a career ladder. Peer evaluation is undertaken. Judgments are made about the worth of one professor as against another. And compensation flows from those decisions. It does seem to me, however difficult it is and however possible it might be for error to creep in, the greatest error is to assume that everyone is equally competent and equally committed when, in fact, we know they are not.
And, as a direct result of the report, Chelmsford, Massachusetts, School Board will consider new classes for the gifted, which has been dropped in recent years. Probably the most neglected students in our educational system in recent years have been those with special aptitudes and talents.
There is one thing about education. I think there have been elements in our country over recent years that have thought of education and that it should become more and more national, a nationalized school system, if you will. I am unalterably opposed. I think that in the great diversity of this country we created the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and we created it at a local level where there could be the intimate and close contact with education on the part of the parents of the children getting that education. I think we should continue, and that basically is where it lies.
I think, with the advent of the Federal Government in some funding for education-and most people are totally unaware of how little the Federal Government participates in that, about 8 percent at all levels of education is the government's share. I think, however, that in recent years, the Federal Government has sought to have far more control than 8 percent of the money would justify. And there's been a kind of image created of education in a vertical line: local, State, and, up here, the Federal Government. Where they really-these branches of government—belong in my view is horizontal. And that is: local, State, and the Federal Government, and divided as to what are the proper, the legitimate functions with regard to education of each level of government. And then, assess where the costs should be to each level based on what its particular interest is and what is necessary to guarantee that interest.
I've been disturbed—and I would like to have—and I won't pick any one of you here; I'm not well acquainted enough to do that. But any one who could respond to this. I think there's something in what has happened in education in recent years-that we're all at fault. And by that I mean parents, within the school system, in our whole social structure. Maybe it came out of the Great Depression and the great war that followed. But maybe generations like my own had a feeling that we should do better by our children. But what we meant by doing better was that they shouldn't have it as hard as we had it, and maybe we made it too easy.
But I also saw others that didn't have any more knowledge of it than I did suddenly find themselves in what you could see was where they wanted to be. And this was true in other subjects. And this is part of what I think education could do. And I just wonder if someone would like to speak to this subject of—I know that, just since the Commission report came out, a number of Governors here in the country, a number of school districts, a number of cities, communities-amazing number—have suddenly jumped at the Commission's report and are going forward implementing. And the main thing they're implementing is a return to the idea of 3 or even 4 years of compulsory English, x number of years of compulsory math and science—these things that once used to be taken for granted in school.
Mr. President, certainly the legislative branch of government is proud that you are here with us today, and, you know, education is 50 percent of our business. And it's been that way always. It's half of all that we do in State government. It's been our focal point of attention for years, and yet that attention has been sharpened recently by Governor Alexander and by the Comprehensive Task Force on Education. And it was encouraging to us when your commission on excellence came forward with the same kind of recommendations that we had.
I have a personal commitment. Coming out of the business world, I certainly am committed to merit—merit and production. I think that merit should be in the field of education. And I think we ought to have evaluation and review on a continuing basis. The legislature now has a commission that is looking at these issues, and we are trying to determine for sure that we will get implementation and continuity in implementation.
You ladies and gentlemen, who are so instrumental to provide American children with this great gift of education, please be very generous. Help the Governor to bring about a better educational system, because America has to be better educated than it is. The burdens of the world are on our shoulders. We have to make peace in the Middle East. We have to make peace in Europe. We have to make sure that tyranny doesn't rise to the Hitler proportions. So, please, most importantly—whatever details you are going to have to work out, I am sure you'll find a way—but be sure that you are very generous with American children.
I think it would be appropriate for me to say that we Tennesseeans are very proud of our public school system. And my seatmate, making the references, I recall having the opportunity last year to spend a month in the Soviet Union visiting many republics far down in Asia. And I want to say to those here as well as the President and the Governor and my colleagues that we should not only be proud of our system; we should be thankful, and emphasize the public education system after reviewing the Soviet system that I had an opportunity to see being practiced.
We have many problems. I think I can speak for the members of the House and, hopefully, the Senate, the Lieutenant Governor. We members of the General Assembly are dedicated to improving education in Tennessee. I personally am committed to a merit pay concept, because that's the American system.
We're glad you're here, Mr. President.
The President. Thank you.
Your Governor, many of your State legislators, parents, and the teachers are calling national attention to the sorry state of America's educational system, a system that was once the finest in all the world. So, I've come here to listen and to learn. Farragut High School and the Knox County school system are shining examples of public education at its best. And it's here that the idea for the basic skills—the first section of Governor Alexander's Better Schools program-started.
Last year your school board was named the Tennessee School Board of the Year. Under the leadership of Lieutenant Governor Wilder and Speaker McWherter, the legislature has established an education task force whose report anticipated many of the findings of the National Commission on Excellence in Education. Your State slogan is, "America at Its Best." And that certainly holds true for Tennessee's schoolrooms.
What better place for a President to take a few lessons for the country on quality education? Tomorrow I will be addressing the national convention of the Parent-Teachers Association, and I will go better armed than when I came here.
I've learned a lot listening to your discussion here today; and I know there are disagreements, but it's important for me to hear those as well. I'll use what I've heard today as we frame our national agenda for excellence in education.
The President. Well now, I've just been through a couple of panels and meeting with teachers from all over Tennessee, and I've been in a panel that was just held here in your building, on the Governor's program here for merit pay for teachers. So, you'll have to realize that I am talking about education somewhere else than here. But there has been a decline in the quality of education.
And I think that this commission that we've had on excellence in education that has recommended a return to more required courses and so forth is going to be a big help.
The President. When you graduate from college. Well, I think all the signs of recovery are very much with us, and I think we'll have recovery long before then. But this is what's also important in your education now. I think we're in a period—we've been in these periods before—but in a period of change where some of the things that were legitimate jobs in the past are no longer going to exist. There's going to be a whole new era in high technology and so forth, and you should be prepared and ready for those jobs. But I am quite sure that recovery is going to come long before then, and there will be employment opportunities.
This is a very special day for me. I don't believe a group exists which understands better, or does more, than yours to safeguard the value of education for us in our country. Thanks to you, education has been the key that opened the golden door of opportunity and, just as important, it's been the faithful servant of our democracy, preserving the values and the freedoms that we hold so dear.
"Train up a child in the way he should go," Solomon wrote, "and when he is old, he will not depart from it." You in this room are the true guardians of that sacred trust. You know that good education does not begin in some faraway bureaucracy. It begins in your homes and neighborhood schools, where it's the responsibility of every parent and teacher and the right of every child.
I urge you, send a message to Washington, D.C., and make it loud and clear. Tell them you want the basics in your schools and the parents back in charge. Tell them that education must never become a political football, because your children come first and they must come first.
You know, I've spoken about our need to strengthen educational institutions in America so that America can become more competitive in world markets and so we can protect our national security. Now, all of us know that our schools must meet the demands of an ever more sophisticated technology. Our instruction in English, math, science, and computer programing must be the best. But I hope we never lose sight of the fact that true wealth and security are born in the spirit, conscience, and character of a nation. And here it is again that you, parents and teachers, who open the eyes and minds of our children to a proud and noble culture. You do it with literature, music, and poetry, and you do it another way that could never be duplicated by government-you do it by giving of yourselves. Every day, in so many personal ways, you show what it means to live a good and worthy life.
I also received a copy of your current contribution to help improve the quality of education, "Looking In On Your School: A Workbook for Improving Public Education." Now, I hope you don't mind if I suggest that we make a little summer assignment. Let's ask parents in America to get that booklet, read it, and follow up on its suggestions. Working together, we can accomplish so much. And we know there is so much to do.
When I ran for President in 1980, I said that this country must recognize the problems in our educational system and start doing something about them. For one thing, many teachers were facing a virtual "mission impossible." I noted at the time that they'd been forced to deal with negative, often destructive trends from outside their classrooms. We can only admire the dedication with which the great majority have tried to meet these problems, because let's face it: It wasn't teachers who created and condoned the drug culture, sexual license, and violence in our society. It wasn't teachers who encouraged the banality of TV over the beauty of the written word. And it wasn't teachers who asked for a "Washington knows best" attitude that often showered them with rules, regulations, and uniformity, while discouraging the rich variety and excellence of our heritage.
Now, some insist the only way to meet this challenge is with one big, five-letter word: money. Well, we could travel down that road, but it won't be a new road to education's promised land. By now, it's an old road that leads to a dead end in learning.
During the 20-year period between 1960 and 1980, spending on education was shooting up and up. But by 1963 college board scores began going down and down. Total spending on education increased in that period almost 600 percent. At the Federal level, spending on education increased twice as fast as spending on defense. Those who argue about the exact level of spending are missing the key point. The question I urge every concerned citizen to ponder is this: If a 600-percent increase couldn't make America smarter, how much more do we need?
I believe common sense tells us we don't have an education problem because we're not spending enough, we have an education problem because we're not getting our money's worth for what we spend. Now, there are some areas such as teachers' salaries where new incentives are clearly needed for better pay. This can be best done at the State and local level. But there are many more areas where the agenda for excellence is not spelled "more spending," but "better learning."
At the core of the Commission's report and our agenda are two themes that I've long advocated. First, true excellence in education will require much greater emphasis on the basics—basic skills of learning and teaching with discipline, basic standards and rewards for excellence, and basic values of parental involvement and community control. Second, to meet the demands of this fast-changing world, we need also to broaden our vision of education. Education must become more than just the province and responsibility of our schools. It's also an integral part of our homes, churches, synagogues, communities, and workplaces. And we must recognize that.
The Commission recognizes that school officials must take the lead in developing community support and that States and localities have the primary responsibility for school finance. We're already seeing strong evidence that the Commission's report touched a nerve. All over America, it's stimulating debate and sparking action. The Florida State House has passed the Commission's basics curriculum. The board in Ypsilanti, Michigan, has voted to extend their elementary school day and raise high school graduation requirements. In Illinois, high school graduation requirements are also being increased. Ditto for Washington State and, also, Virginia, where the school board of education plans to overhaul their public school curriculum this summer.
As President, I intend to do everything I can to promote and enhance these reforms and to broaden the scope of education throughout our society. For example, to help reform the education system, there are areas where the Federal Government can make a direct contribution. Being prepared for the new era of high technology will require improved teaching of math and science, so we have proposed legislation to stimulate training of more math and science teachers. We're beginning a new program-one I'm participating in myself—to honor some of America's best math and science teachers.
We want to provide more opportunities for parents, so we're proposing education savings accounts to help hard-working families save for college education. As parents, we want to enable you to save up to $1,000 per year, per child, with no tax on the interest.
Now, I happen to believe that just as more incentives are needed within our schools, greater competition is needed among our schools. Without a race, there can be no champion, no records broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.
As President, I intend to do everything I can to promote and enhance these reforms and to broaden the scope of education, to help the education system, and to make a direct contribution. Where the Federal Government is not making a direct contribution, we can provide leadership to highlight local programs that merit special attention. Yesterday, I had the great pleasure of meeting with the dynamic young Governor of Tennessee, Lamar Alexander. He is pushing a simple idea which I believe is long overdue for our country—merit pay increases to attract and keep the very best people in the teaching profession.
When I spoke out for merit pay, a representative of the NEA called my statement "a disgraceful assault" on the teaching profession. Well, frankly, that surprised me, because the national Commission directly addressed this issue when it said, "Persons preparing to teach should be required to meet high educational standards... and to demonstrate competence in an academic discipline."
We're trying to broaden community support for education so it, in turn, can more effectively serve society and strengthen democracy. We're urging corporations, community organizations, and neighborhood groups across the country to adopt schools and help them meet their educational and vocational needs with funds, equipment, and personnel. There's a wealth of talent, training, and wisdom among the members of our communities, whether it be in business, labor, the professions, or the military. Learning from the achievers of America can greatly enrich the educational experience of our children. And I'm happy to say that this is spreading already, just with the announcement of the Commission's report across the country. People are lining up and volunteering, wanting to be of help to their local school systems.
Working with you, our parents and teachers, trusting in your sound judgment and hard work, in your fairness and your faith, we can and we will climb that lofty peak to excellence in education. Clark Mollenhoff, a tough-minded journalist who also understands the crucial importance of parents and teachers, said it very well in a poem he wrote called "Teacher":
You are the moulders of their dreams-Heroes who build or crush their young beliefs in right or wrong.
You are the spark that sets afire a poet's hand, Or lights the flame in some great singer's song.
You are the idols of the young—the very young.
You are their models, by profession set apart.
You are the guardians of a million dreams.
Your every smile or frown can heal or pierce a heart.
Yours are one hundred lives—one thousand lives.
Yours is the pride of loving them, the sorrow, too.
Your patient work, your touch, make you the source of hope
That fills their souls with dreams, and make those dreams come true.
It's a privilege to welcome such a distinguished group of high school seniors to the White House, along with your parents, teachers, and Members of the Congress. And on behalf of a proud nation, I congratulate the 1983 Presidential Scholars on their achievements. You are America's future and symbolize her greatest hopes. You're among our best young achievers not only in book learning but in the arts and in leadership. Your very presence here represents the commitment of your communities and your country to excellence in education.
For a democracy to function, its people must understand not only reading, writing, and arithmetic but literature, history, and values. Someone once said that, "if you think education is expensive, you should try ignorance." And that sums up the situation pretty well. To be American means to understand that education is the key that opens the golden door of opportunity and, just as important, it's been the faithful guardian of our democracy. It's preserved the conscience and the character of our nation.
We know that knowledge and freedom are inseparable, and so it's no accident that we are the freest people on Earth. And we who are that, built an educational system unrivaled in the history of civilization. You're among its finest graduates, so a great deal of responsibility naturally falls upon you. Many of you wrote in your essays about the debt you owe your families, communities, and schools, and how you intend to pay them back. I'm glad you feel that way. America needs your commitment, your knowledge, and your education. Your country has made an enormous investment in you, and we're relying on your energies and abilities to carry us into the next century-free and strong and prosperous.
While you finish your education, I plan to work with your parents and teachers and business and labor, civic and government leaders in a national drive for educational excellence. Although your instruction, obviously, has been superb, a study commissioned by my / Administration warned that the overall quality of American instruction was declining dangerously. As a result, we're taking steps to ensure that every young person in America receives the best education possible. One priority is to weed out teachers who can't teach and promote those who excel. We're looking into ideas like merit pay and the master teachers programs. But perhaps most importantly, we want to make ours an agenda behind which all our people can unite.
As you know, a very important ingredient of a good education is to learn well the lessons of history. Your studies must show in painful detail all that your parents and grandparents have sacrificed so that you can be free. You can be proud today that your country is contributing to this valiant struggle for peace. We're keeping our military strong for only one reason—to deter any adversary from thinking it can achieve its goals through war. The Americans who came before you learned horrible lessons about taking the easy way out of challenges to freedom. No war in this century started because America was too well prepared. Every one was triggered because some tyrant, somewhere, figured we were off guard. The highest cost in American lives were paid not because we were too strong, but because we were thought to be weak.
I'm trying to find out something about his boyhood, because we didn't live on the wrong side of the railroad tracks, but we lived so close to them we could hear the whistle real loud. And I know very much about the working group. I grew up in poverty and got what education I got all by myself and so forth, and I think it is sheer demagoguery to pretend that this economic program which we've submitted is not aimed at helping the great cross section of people in this country that have been burdened for too long by big government and high taxes. From 10 to 50 to 60 thousand dollars covers, certainly, all the middle class, and they pay 72 percent of the tax. And 73 percent of our tax relief or more is going to that bracket of workers. And we're going to do our utmost to keep that bottom rung of the ladder clear for those people that haven't yet started to climb.
The President. Well, this will not allow any government interference in any way in education, because the aid is going directly to the parents of children who are going to the schools. So, this will not lead to any government direction or interference in any way in education, if that was the meaning of your question.
The President. Support Catholic education of schools? No, this is ruled to be the separation of church and state that they can't do that, but this is why we're proposing a program that we think will help, by getting the aid through the tax credits directly to the parents and that this will help solve the problem.
The President. Well, Mr. Adams,1 to the teachers here at this school, and to all of you students, I can't quite describe what a pleasure this is for us. We're here because we heard about this school. We heard what beginning with one man to save a school has developed into an educational institution of which you all must be very proud, because there aren't too many educational institutions in the country that can match your record. And we had to see this for ourselves—not just to see it for ourselves but also because we hope that we can spread the word.
And maybe I can illustrate what I'm trying to say was when I was Governor of California, every year they used to bring to the capital a group of students who'd come from other countries and who, on an exchange-student basis, would spend a year in our schools, usually in high school. And every year I had the same question for them. I would say, "Tell me"—these students from all over, Europe and every place else—I'd say, "Tell me, how do our schools compare? Are they tougher than yours? Is the work harder?" And then I'd have to wait until they stopped laughing. That was their assessment of the difference, and I'm talking about schools that weren't like yours. I wish we could get some of them in here. I don't think they'd laugh, because I think they'd find out that you met the same educational levels they do.
The President. Bless you, and I'm glad you asked that question about the college loans and so forth and the educational help. Much has been made of this, and it's been badly distorted in the reporting.
I was under the impression—and maybe I was wrong—I didn't know there were any court cases pending—but I was under the impression that the problem of segregated schools had been settled, that we have desegregation. But I was getting complaints-and even before I got here as President, I was getting complaints that some of the Internal Revenue agents, the tax collectors that collect the income tax, were harassing some schools, even though they were desegregated—but harassing them and threatening them with taking away their tax exemption-which educational institutions have-if they didn't oh, set up scholarship programs or go out actively recruiting and take steps to try and increase their efforts at desegregation. And I didn't think that this was the place of Treasury agents to be doing this. So, I told the Secretary at Treasury that I didn't think that. I think as individuals we get harassed enough by the Internal Revenue collectors. And I didn't know that there were a couple of legal cases pending.
You must be aware that there are millions and millions of parents all over this country terribly dissatisfied with the education their children are getting in schools—the lack of discipline and everything else. And with that deterioration in so much of education you are such a shining light that, as I said in the beginning, I want to spread the word. This is the way it should be done. You're doing it.
This past year alone, American hunters have paid more than $107 million toward these conservation efforts. The money will fund important studies of game and their habitat. It'll provide food and habitat projects for wildlife. And portions will go for hunter safety and education courses where our youngsters will be taught marksmanship, firearms safety, and some of the values and ethics of hunting and the outdoors. I deeply appreciate your contributions to preserving our national treasures for the benefit of our people and future generations.
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
But our opposition would derail this recovery faster than you can say "tax hike." [Laughter] When we took office 8 years ago, America was in the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression: double-digit inflation, interest rates of 21 percent, taxes and spending out of control. But we cut taxes, slashed inflation by two-thirds, sliced interest rates in half, and today America is in the longest peacetime expansion ever recorded. We're going into our 72d month. And since the expansion began, we've created—I've got the latest one, Phil—it's 14.4 million new jobs. And they're good jobs, three-quarters of them the kind that pay between $20,000 and $50,000 a year, or even more. In the State of Texas, real personal income is up by 10 percent. And today in America, a greater proportion of our population is employed than ever before in the history of the United States. Now, I know we see that unemployment rate, but there's always going to be an unemployment rate. There are always going to be people who, on their own, are voluntarily between jobs. And there are always going to be newcomers coming into the job market. But what I learned since I've been here is that the statisticians consider the potential employment pool of the United States everyone, male and female, from the age of 16 and up. That includes all those millions still getting an education, those retirees who are out there on the golf course. But that's the potential pool. Well, today 62.7 percent of that entire population pool are employed.
I understand that last March, after Secretary Schweiker and Congressman Gore kicked off this campaign, over 500,000 people received free health-care education and screening services. Now, this is the type of private sector initiative that Bill Verity and members of the Task Force on Private Sector Initiatives have been bringing to my attention all year.
But the problem of health care costs is so pressing you can't carry that full burden alone. For the last 12-month period, health care costs went up almost two-and-a-half times the overall inflation rate. In 1982 the cost of health insurance rose nearly 16 percent. Health care costs are consuming a growing portion of the Nation's wealth, and this is wealth that cannot be spent on education or housing or other social needs.
I was also distressed that the Senate voted down—and the House refused to consider-our bill to provide tuition tax credits to deserving families. It was charged that this bill would have favored the rich. Well, that's a false charge. Those in high tax brackets were not eligible for the tax credits. The bill would have benefited those low- and middle-income people who bear the burden of tuition to send their children to parochial or independent schools and, at the same time, pay their full share of taxes to support the public school system. There would be no loss of revenue to public education, but there would be healthy competition among schools, which would improve the quality of education in both systems. Tuition tax credits and other unfinished business Americans want and need, like prayer in school and enterprise zones, will be pushed again by us as soon as the Congress returns.
First, education: This is the crucial tool that black Americans need to make progress. In the years before we took office, our nation's schools had begun to show unmistakable signs of crisis. From 1963 to '83—or to '81, college entrance examination scores underwent a virtually unbroken decline. Science achievement scores of 17-year-olds showed a similar drop. And most shocking, the National Commission on Excellence in Education reported that more than one-tenth of our 17-year-olds can be considered functionally illiterate.
We took office determined to change that. And since our administration put education at the top of the national agenda, we've seen a dramatic turnaround. In 1980 only a handful of States had statewide task forces on education. Today they all do. In addition, 47 States are considering new graduation requirements; 47 are studying improvements in teacher certification; and 17 are exploring merit pay for teachers. It all adds up to the most far-reaching education reform and renewal movement since the turn of the century.
In large part, because of our efforts, black children are beginning to get the educations they need to participate fully in American life. And as we go forward, let me assure you that we will remain committed to the future of our historically black colleges and universities.
These schools were very much on my mind when we started here, because they meant so much at a time when it would have otherwise been very difficult for so many to get higher education. And I was determined that they should not be left withering on a vine.
But we've also made it our policy to help only those with a clear, demonstrable need. Those who can do it on their own shouldn't be taking the money we need to help those who couldn't receive a higher education without it. And, believe me, I know whereof I speak, because a long time ago I was on a campus getting a diploma, and I had to work my way through.
I am happy to be back in America, a country to which I owe personally a great deal, namely part of my legal education at one of your finest universities.
No, the proposal is for people to go and be the same kind of missionaries and see if they cannot explain democracy. One of the first meetings we had in connection with that was here in this room in which people from all over the world came, and it was a session during our election year to tell them about elections and how legitimate elections could he won; not those kind where you've only got one person to vote for and you'd better vote for him or somebody'll come and get you. And it's an education program, the idea of worldwide—and pointing out the differences that those countries that have chosen—new countries, whether it's Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea—those countries that have chosen our idea, our way instead of statism, authoritarianism or totalitarianism. Their living standard, their prosperity, their freedom for their people is so much greater than anything the other countries have. We just want to explain to people how it works.
The President. Well, I wouldn't say that you don't have representation in government. You know, we have a number of programs, and this, while it is not exactly connected with the Government, it certainly gives you access to government. But we try to represent all of the people in the country. And I think that the things that we do through education and through all of those who deal with you is comparable to an actual representation by youth.
The participants were part of the CloseUp Foundation program, a nonpartisan educational foundation providing secondary school students opportunities to study the American political system.
Now, I know that education, the doorway to opportunity, has always been a major concern to all of you. Indeed, we were talking about it at our table here. When we arrived in Washington, educational standards had been falling for nearly 20 years. So our administration appointed the National Commission on Excellence in Education, and we've been mobilizing support across the country to implement its recommendations.
We're turning the situation around, and I'm absolutely determined to provide opportunities for all American children to develop the skills they need in this society. One way to do that is through bilingual education.
Some of the things that have led perhaps to confusion—is taking something like the educational programs. We found out that people were eligible when we came here for college grants and loans for their children, and their income level was too high for this to be warranted. So, yes, we changed the income level, but this allowed us to increase further down to the people with real need and do more for them.
The President. Democracy is a political system in which the people have a major say in their destiny. Democracy should consist of representative and pluralistic processes that will guarantee that the people take part in the decisions that will affect their lives. The system should ensure that the various currents of opinion have free access to fair, regular, and competitive elections based on the full observance of citizens rights. We realize, however, that while democracy requires elections, elections alone are not enough. Democracy must also consist of equal access to education, justice, and employment. Democracy also means the absence of tyranny, whether this be the tyranny of a minority over the majority or that of the majority over a minority.
We have every right to dream heroic dreams. Those who say that we're in a time when there are not heroes, they just don't know where to look. You can see heroes every day going in and out of factory gates. Others, a handful in number, produce enough food to feed all of us and then the world beyond. You meet heroes across a counter, and they're on both sides of that counter. There are entrepreneurs with faith in themselves and faith in an idea who create new jobs, new wealth and opportunity. They're individuals and families whose taxes support the government and whose voluntary gifts support church, charity, culture, art, and education. Their patriotism is quiet, but deep. Their values sustain our national life.
Now, already some have protested that there must be no reduction in aid to schools. Well, let me point out that Federal aid to education amounts to only 8 percent of the total educational funding, and for this 8 percent, the Federal Government has insisted on tremendously disproportionate share of control over our schools. Whatever reductions we've proposed in that 8 percent will amount to very little in the total cost of education. They will, however, restore more authority to States and local school districts.
Nancy and I consider it a great pleasure to be here today to congratulate you who have successfully completed your education and training at the United States Military Academy. I'm a little self-conscious being introduced as your Commander when I began my military career as a second lieutenant in the Cavalry, the horse Cavalry, that is. [Laughter] I have threatened on occasion that that was the reason I got this job was so that I could reinstitute the horse Cavalry. [Laughter]
Already enlistments are up, and so are reenlistments. And surprisingly—well, maybe we shouldn't be surprised—many who have already left the service are now returning. There's also been a decided rise in quality as measured by educational and testing attainment. Something other than pay and benefits contributed to this.
On regulatory relief, the entire Government is working to ease the burden. And someday, maybe the blizzard of paperwork will be just a light snowstorm for the private sector, for education, and for State and local governments.
FDR brought the colors of hope and confidence to the era and I, like millions of others, became an enthusiastic New Dealer. We followed FDR because he offered a mix of ideas and movement. A former Governor himself, I believe that FDR would today be amazed and appalled at the growth of the Federal Government's power. Too many in government in recent years have invoked his name to justify what they were doing, forgetting that it was FDR who said, "In the conduct of public utilities, of banks, of insurance, of agriculture, of education, of social welfare—Washington must be discouraged from interfering."
Secretary of Education Bell withdrew proposed rules that would have required a particular form of bilingual education—at a cost to school boards of over a billion dollars over the first 5 years. But while there's a need for bilingual education, it's absolutely wrong-headed to encourage and preserve native languages instead of teaching the language of our land to the non-English speaking, so they can have the keys to opportunity.
"He has examined the options, as I suggested, and the choices he's made are taking him far away from me. He believes there are opportunities for him in education, travel, and experience. No doubt there are. There's a stack of thirsty terry towels I bought for a college basketball player. He left them here. He left the shampoo and soap and cords and sweaters, too. He won't need those things. His country will now provide for all his needs. He thinks he's getting a good deal. No doubt he is. Personally, I'm inclined to believe the country is getting the good deal. In exchange for all their provisions, they are getting one tall, tanned fellow with summer bleached hair, a sharp young mind, more potential and possibility than I have the space here to describe.
Our interest payments on the debt alone are now running more than $96 billion a year. That's more than the total combined profits last year of the 500 biggest companies in the country; or, to put it another way, Washington spends more on interest than on all of its education, nutrition, and medical programs combined.
Similarly, education is the principal responsibility of local school systems, teachers, parents, citizen boards, and State governments. By eliminating the Department of Education less than 2 years after it was created, we cannot only reduce the budget but ensure that local needs and preferences, rather than the wishes of Washington, determine the education of our children.
And this isn't original with me. This was first suggested when the first proposal for Federal aid to education was made. Norris Cotton, then Senator from New Hampshire, looking at the amount of money that was suggested—and the Federal Government was protesting that it meant no interference; just wanted to help by giving money—and he said, "Well, if that's really true," he said, "why don't we turn the tobacco tax over to the States and the only restriction is that it be used for education?" And you know how they defeated him? They said, "Well, it wouldn't be right to educate our children with a sin tax." So the Federal Government got its foot in the door and went on from there. That's all we want to stop or change.
But I would think that first of all, education-we built the greatest school system the world has ever seen and built it at the local level and the local school district level. And then the Federal Government got into the school business only by having preempted so much of the tax resources, and those tax resources that grew with the economy faster than something like the property tax, which is the principal basis for educational funding. Then they got into it through that money thing, having preempted the money, created the problem, and then they said, "Well, now we want to help you." But in return for the help, they wanted to also regulate, and have interfered to a large extent.
I would think that this would include such things as welfare; certainly, it would include education. And then with this, under this federalism, review again what legitimately and honestly belongs at the Federal level and at the local level in the system of taxes.
I am opposed with every fiber of my being to discrimination, and to have set in law the fact that tax exemptions could be denied to schools that—and educational institutions that practiced discrimination. Now, as I say, it probably wasn't handled as well as it could, because, it being in our minds a procedural matter—and in my mind, certainly—we didn't anticipate that it was going to be as misinterpreted as it was. And what we have accomplished with what we did was we've prevented the IRS from determining national social policy all by itself. It'll now be by elected officials, the Congress.
I have already explained myself with regard to the discrimination in education, and I think that my record will stand for itself, if anyone wants to look at it, that I have been on the side of opposition to bigotry and discrimination and prejudice—and long before it ever became a kind of national issue under the title of civil rights. And my life has been spent on that side.
The President. No, I don't believe so. All we're doing is what every administration before us has done and we hadn't been doing. It's simply a case so that we all know what is going on. And, also, we've seen the situation when it would have been very, I think, educational for the people and advantageous for us if two or three particular issues could have been brought before the public; and because of not checking with each other, we found three separate departments all going at once with their statements.
Now, there are a number of programs that are going forward. For example, in five States, started by the governments—which ought to restore some people's faith that our turning back of things to the State governments is not—in these five States they have started programs, not statewide, but in several important, key cities as an experiment-and a very successful one so far—in which the private sector is involved in taking the least-likely-to-succeed seniors in high school into job-training programs. They don't go for the best—they don't, those they figure—but they found some actual statistics of the percentage of high school students that were—you could really conceive that they were going to have trouble when they got out and they probably were not going to go on to any additional education in college or anything. And 60 percent of them wind up within 2 years on welfare. So, they started this experiment, and it has been, I think it's something like up in the 90 percent of salvage of these students who were judged by their associates and their teachers and so forth to be the least likely to make it.
In 1960 the Federal Government had 132 categorical grant programs, costing $7 billion. When I took office, there were approximately 500, costing nearly a hundred billion dollars—13 programs for energy, 36 for pollution control, 66 for social services, 90 for education. And here in the Congress, it takes at least 166 committees just to try to keep track of them.
In 1984 the Federal Government will apply the full proceeds from certain excise taxes to a grass roots trust fund that will belong in fair shares to the 50 States. The total amount flowing into this fund will be $28 billion a year. Over the next 4 years the States can use this money in either of two ways. If they want to continue receiving Federal grants in such areas as transportation, education, and social services, they can use their trust fund money to pay for the grants. Or to the extent they choose to forgo the Federal grant programs, they can use their trust fund money on their own for those or other purposes. There will be a mandatory pass-through of part of these funds to local governments.
We're cutting the size of the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education, agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
We've proposed the broad outlines of a plan to restore accountability to government. It includes the transfer to our States of more than 40 Federal programs in the areas of education, transportation, community development, and social services. And we want to send back to you the tax sources to pay for them as well. The centerpiece of the proposal is the almost dollar-for-dollar swap of two of the largest areas of welfare. The Federal Government would take over Medicaid in exchange for State assumption of Aid to Families with Dependent Children and food stamps,
Working out details for such a change of direction is never easy. Perhaps a starting point for the dialog can be the broad proposal that I outlined during my State of the Union message. Briefly, it suggests the transfer of 45 categorical programs to the States, along with the funding sources and authority to manage them. The list includes everything from education to community development, from transportation to social services.
The battle against discrimination still goes on, and much remains to be done. But in a single generation, an entire nation recommitted itself to the cause of equal rights and used the full force of the law to ban once and for all racial bias in public education, in hiring, and in the voting booth.
I wasn't exactly properly dressed for the occasion, but I couldn't resist getting in line and joining them for the little time I was there. Now, a roster of their names would probably reveal a variety of ethnic backgrounds. As would be true of any group of Americans, they included different races and religions, I know—but who asked? And the line was coeducational—girls and boys. Looking at their fresh, wholesome and, yes, happy, enthusiastic faces, even though they'd been there since early morning, I was looking at the future of America and, believe me, the future looked mighty good.
We're cutting the number of people in the Federal payroll by 75,000 over the next few years and are fighting to dismantle the Department of Energy and the Department of Education—agencies whose policies have frequently been exactly the opposite of what we need for real energy growth and sound education for our children.
The Class of '32 has no yearbook to record our final days on the campus. The Class of '33 didn't put out a Prism because of the hardships of that Great Depression era. The faculty sometimes went for months on end without pay. And yet this school made it possible for young men and women, myself included, to get an education even though we were totally without funds, our families destitute victims of the Depression. Yes, this place is deep in my heart. Everything that has been good in my life began here.
And for those who say that—first of all, that this benefits the rich, the overwhelming majority of parents or families with children in independent or parochial schools in America today have incomes of under $25,000. Forty percent of the students in the Catholic schools of Chicago are black. This whole measure is simply a recognition of the unfairness of people, who in an effort to—they hope to improve the education or get the kind of education that they particularly want for their children, are willing to pay the full burden of the taxes that support the public school system.
But these parents are willing to pay for one system of education by taxes that they do not use at all and then out of their own pockets pay for another system of education to educate their own children, which relieves some of the burden on the taxpayers. They don't impose on them. And I just think it's simple fairness to give them some kind of a break. And, as I say, the economics of it points out that this is benefiting those people at the lower and middle-income ranges.
In Southeast Asia, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations—ASEAN, as it's called—is cooperating to improve the economic, cultural, and educational growth of that region. Our country has strong mutual ties with ASEAN and its individual members. And the ANZUS Pact with Australia and New Zealand is one of the most significant relationships we have in the world today.
The President. Well, yes, we've talked about that, but providing there would not be any increase in Federal administration of those funds. We think there is a parallel between the Federal involvement in education and the decline in quality over recent years. What is more needed than just throwing money at education—we're right now spending more money than any other country in the world; we're spending $215 billion on education in this country. We think what has happened is—well, the report speaks for itself, that we have let up, we are not actually taking the students to the limit of their ability. We think we need more required courses. This is what the Commission has come up with.
And I know that today a question was asked of David Gardner as to the one thing that was lacking in the report was the demand for a big Federal program. I thought his answer explained it very well when he said, "No, we are trying to improve the quality of education, and that doesn't take a big Federal program."
This past year alone, American hunters have paid more than $107 million toward these conservation efforts. The money will fund important studies of game and their habitat. It'll provide food and habitat projects for wildlife. And portions will go for hunter safety and education courses where our youngsters will be taught marksmanship, firearms safety, and some of the values and ethics of hunting and the outdoors. I deeply appreciate your contributions to preserving our national treasures for the benefit of our people and future generations.
The President. Not really, because, you see, education is not the prime responsibility of the Federal Government, and the total budget for education in the United States is far greater than the defense budget. As a matter of fact, the Federal Government actually provides less than 10 percent of the cost of education through the Department of Education.
Now, we've gone through a period of a number of years, about 10 years, in which we went from $760 million Federal aid to education to about $14.9 billion, and that's a 2,000-percent increase. And it was during that period that the testing scores—the college testing, entrance tests, and so forth-began to decline so severely.
Now, I appointed a Commission to study and bring back a report on what we felt was a decline in education in our schools. They brought back a masterful report. And in that report there's very little suggestion for more money. What they're talking about can be corrected without money. It takes some leadership. It takes some return to basics. It takes having students that now have to learn what they're supposed to learn in a class before they're moved on to the next class, just because they've come to the end of the year. And there's an awful lot of that goes on.
We think there's some common sense that is needed. And so we've proven that money, throwing money at it isn't the answer. And the Federal Government can never match the funding of schools at the local and State level, where we've created the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and then have let it deteriorate. And I think you can make a case that it began to deteriorate when the Federal Government started interfering in education.
The President. Well, I don't know that so many of those things—there would be some increase in money there, I'm quite sure. But again, how much is being wasted on some things that aren't contributing to their education that could be transferred to that? And I think that—well, right now there are three—Time magazine, just a few days ago, had an article in there about three inner-city high schools: one in the Bronx, New York, one in Los Angeles, one in Austin, Texas. And just by changes from the principal's office down, in leadership, these schools have become what schools are supposed to be, to the extent that students are leaving private schools to transfer to these public schools.
And I want to implement as completely as possible that plan that was submitted to us by this Commission that was investigating education. And it won't cost $11 billion, which a nameless gentleman has suggested he would advocate that we spend. [Laughter]
The President. Well, first of all, this whole question of cost in education, and I think there's a lot of misunderstanding about it—I recognize it would cost more for this. At the same time, I believe that if such a plan is instituted, then in budgeting you take care of that and, at the same time, possibly see whether there are other things of much lower priority.
There is one thing that I think I should take advantage of you, and call attention to this fact—that in the last 20 years, spending on education in this country has gone up 600 percent. Now, many could say, "Well, that was because of 20 years of continued inflation." But look at it in constant dollars. In that same period of time, the per-pupil cost in education—in constant dollars, allowing for inflation—has nearly doubled. And in that same period of time, we know, are when the problems have arisen that are confronting us. So, you have to say, "Is just purely money an answer, or don't we have to look deeper for some of the answers to the problems we have in education?"
I know that it can be done, and I know this comes down to always the view is, "Well, Federal Government." The amount of money in education today, incidentally-with regard to the reaction to a previous statement—is that in 1982 the total budget for national defense was $179 billion. It was 215 billion for education. And I don't fault that at all. Education is truly important and as important to our national security as defense. But we can't neglect either one of them.
But I think that the whole question of school funding comes down to one of laying out the layers of government. We built the greatest public school system the world has ever seen, and we built it at the local school level—local, the State, and the Federal Government. And right now, they've been lined up vertically. And it's local and State, and then on top is the Federal Government, which only provides 8 percent of the educational budget, but which has, kind of, grabbed off about 50 percent of trying to regulate the schools.
The President. But I think that then you work out in this the—I said that we were vertical; we ought to be horizontal. We should be looking at what properly belongs for decision at the local level, what is the proper place for the State, and what is the proper place for the Federal Government-its interest in education and its responsibility-and look at them in that way; and then, proportionately to their responsibilities, expect the support of schools to be laid out in that same way.
Secretary Bell I'm very grateful that we have education now up where it's high on the education agenda of this country. It certainly has occupied a great deal of nationwide importance. And we're grateful to you, and those in the discussions today Mr. President, express their appreciation for the fact that we do have education now such a high priority. And I know it's because you've participated in events like this one, and we appreciate that. Well, those are the—
The President. Could I just—
Secretary Bell Yes.
The President. Could I just ask you—
Secretary Bell. Yes.
At the higher education level, it's done routinely. We have assistant professors, associate professors, full professors. We have a career ladder. Peer evaluation is undertaken. Judgments are made about the worth of one professor as against another. And compensation flows from those decisions. It does seem to me, however difficult it is and however possible it might be for error to creep in, the greatest error is to assume that everyone is equally competent and equally committed when, in fact, we know they are not.
And, as a direct result of the report, Chelmsford, Massachusetts, School Board will consider new classes for the gifted, which has been dropped in recent years. Probably the most neglected students in our educational system in recent years have been those with special aptitudes and talents.
This is a very special day for me. I don't believe a group exists which understands better, or does more, than yours to safeguard the value of education for us in our country. Thanks to you, education has been the key that opened the golden door of opportunity and, just as important, it's been the faithful servant of our democracy, preserving the values and the freedoms that we hold so dear.
"Train up a child in the way he should go," Solomon wrote, "and when he is old, he will not depart from it." You in this room are the true guardians of that sacred trust. You know that good education does not begin in some faraway bureaucracy. It begins in your homes and neighborhood schools, where it's the responsibility of every parent and teacher and the right of every child.
I urge you, send a message to Washington, D.C., and make it loud and clear. Tell them you want the basics in your schools and the parents back in charge. Tell them that education must never become a political football, because your children come first and they must come first.
You know, I've spoken about our need to strengthen educational institutions in America so that America can become more competitive in world markets and so we can protect our national security. Now, all of us know that our schools must meet the demands of an ever more sophisticated technology. Our instruction in English, math, science, and computer programing must be the best. But I hope we never lose sight of the fact that true wealth and security are born in the spirit, conscience, and character of a nation. And here it is again that you, parents and teachers, who open the eyes and minds of our children to a proud and noble culture. You do it with literature, music, and poetry, and you do it another way that could never be duplicated by government-you do it by giving of yourselves. Every day, in so many personal ways, you show what it means to live a good and worthy life.
I also received a copy of your current contribution to help improve the quality of education, "Looking In On Your School: A Workbook for Improving Public Education." Now, I hope you don't mind if I suggest that we make a little summer assignment. Let's ask parents in America to get that booklet, read it, and follow up on its suggestions. Working together, we can accomplish so much. And we know there is so much to do.
When I ran for President in 1980, I said that this country must recognize the problems in our educational system and start doing something about them. For one thing, many teachers were facing a virtual "mission impossible." I noted at the time that they'd been forced to deal with negative, often destructive trends from outside their classrooms. We can only admire the dedication with which the great majority have tried to meet these problems, because let's face it: It wasn't teachers who created and condoned the drug culture, sexual license, and violence in our society. It wasn't teachers who encouraged the banality of TV over the beauty of the written word. And it wasn't teachers who asked for a "Washington knows best" attitude that often showered them with rules, regulations, and uniformity, while discouraging the rich variety and excellence of our heritage.
Now, some insist the only way to meet this challenge is with one big, five-letter word: money. Well, we could travel down that road, but it won't be a new road to education's promised land. By now, it's an old road that leads to a dead end in learning.
During the 20-year period between 1960 and 1980, spending on education was shooting up and up. But by 1963 college board scores began going down and down. Total spending on education increased in that period almost 600 percent. At the Federal level, spending on education increased twice as fast as spending on defense. Those who argue about the exact level of spending are missing the key point. The question I urge every concerned citizen to ponder is this: If a 600-percent increase couldn't make America smarter, how much more do we need?
I believe common sense tells us we don't have an education problem because we're not spending enough, we have an education problem because we're not getting our money's worth for what we spend. Now, there are some areas such as teachers' salaries where new incentives are clearly needed for better pay. This can be best done at the State and local level. But there are many more areas where the agenda for excellence is not spelled "more spending," but "better learning."
At the core of the Commission's report and our agenda are two themes that I've long advocated. First, true excellence in education will require much greater emphasis on the basics—basic skills of learning and teaching with discipline, basic standards and rewards for excellence, and basic values of parental involvement and community control. Second, to meet the demands of this fast-changing world, we need also to broaden our vision of education. Education must become more than just the province and responsibility of our schools. It's also an integral part of our homes, churches, synagogues, communities, and workplaces. And we must recognize that.
The Commission recognizes that school officials must take the lead in developing community support and that States and localities have the primary responsibility for school finance. We're already seeing strong evidence that the Commission's report touched a nerve. All over America, it's stimulating debate and sparking action. The Florida State House has passed the Commission's basics curriculum. The board in Ypsilanti, Michigan, has voted to extend their elementary school day and raise high school graduation requirements. In Illinois, high school graduation requirements are also being increased. Ditto for Washington State and, also, Virginia, where the school board of education plans to overhaul their public school curriculum this summer.
As President, I intend to do everything I can to promote and enhance these reforms and to broaden the scope of education throughout our society. For example, to help reform the education system, there are areas where the Federal Government can make a direct contribution. Being prepared for the new era of high technology will require improved teaching of math and science, so we have proposed legislation to stimulate training of more math and science teachers. We're beginning a new program-one I'm participating in myself—to honor some of America's best math and science teachers.
We want to provide more opportunities for parents, so we're proposing education savings accounts to help hard-working families save for college education. As parents, we want to enable you to save up to $1,000 per year, per child, with no tax on the interest.
Now, I happen to believe that just as more incentives are needed within our schools, greater competition is needed among our schools. Without a race, there can be no champion, no records broken, no excellence in education or any other walk of life.
As President, I intend to do everything I can to promote and enhance these reforms and to broaden the scope of education, to help the education system, and to make a direct contribution. Where the Federal Government is not making a direct contribution, we can provide leadership to highlight local programs that merit special attention. Yesterday, I had the great pleasure of meeting with the dynamic young Governor of Tennessee, Lamar Alexander. He is pushing a simple idea which I believe is long overdue for our country—merit pay increases to attract and keep the very best people in the teaching profession.
When I spoke out for merit pay, a representative of the NEA called my statement "a disgraceful assault" on the teaching profession. Well, frankly, that surprised me, because the national Commission directly addressed this issue when it said, "Persons preparing to teach should be required to meet high educational standards... and to demonstrate competence in an academic discipline."
We're trying to broaden community support for education so it, in turn, can more effectively serve society and strengthen democracy. We're urging corporations, community organizations, and neighborhood groups across the country to adopt schools and help them meet their educational and vocational needs with funds, equipment, and personnel. There's a wealth of talent, training, and wisdom among the members of our communities, whether it be in business, labor, the professions, or the military. Learning from the achievers of America can greatly enrich the educational experience of our children. And I'm happy to say that this is spreading already, just with the announcement of the Commission's report across the country. People are lining up and volunteering, wanting to be of help to their local school systems.
Working with you, our parents and teachers, trusting in your sound judgment and hard work, in your fairness and your faith, we can and we will climb that lofty peak to excellence in education. Clark Mollenhoff, a tough-minded journalist who also understands the crucial importance of parents and teachers, said it very well in a poem he wrote called "Teacher":
You are the moulders of their dreams-Heroes who build or crush their young beliefs in right or wrong.
You are the spark that sets afire a poet's hand, Or lights the flame in some great singer's song.
You are the idols of the young—the very young.
You are their models, by profession set apart.
You are the guardians of a million dreams.
Your every smile or frown can heal or pierce a heart.
Yours are one hundred lives—one thousand lives.
Yours is the pride of loving them, the sorrow, too.
Your patient work, your touch, make you the source of hope
That fills their souls with dreams, and make those dreams come true.
He's been taking the no-nonsense stands that we need on the budget, on education, and crime. He's proving the truth of Andrew Jackson's words that, "One man with courage makes a majority." George wants to make it safe for Californians to walk their streets again without having to be afraid. He said no to Prop. 15 because you won't get gun control by disarming law abiding citizens. There's only one way to get real gun control: Disarm the thugs and the criminals, lock them up, and if you don't actually throw away the key, at least lose it for a long time.
And maybe we should be reminded that these gentlemen up here, holders of the Congressional Medal of Honor, it is given for service above and beyond the call of duty. But you know better than most that Hispanic Americans have not always been remembered for their service or valor, have not always been treated with the dignity, respect, and fairness they deserve. This was particularly true at the end of World War II, when those who had fought for their country returned home to confront discrimination in education, health care, housing, employment, and other areas. But true to your tradition, you responded with character and courage.
And we're moving in another area: to end the politicizing of education, bring excellence back to our schools, better opportunity for our schoolchildren, including effective bilingual programs so important for Hispanic children. And I hope you'll join me in persuading the Congress to accede to the overwhelming desire of the American people for a constitutional amendment permitting prayer in our schools.
I know that Barbara would be as encouraged as I am at the broad array of groups and individuals represented here today-leaders from the Congress, from education, business and industry, church and service groups, and State and local government. This is heartening, because it will take a united effort by all our people to achieve our goal: the elimination of adult functional illiteracy in the United States.
Well, money alone can't buy our children quality education. I don't know how certain politicians, with a straight face, can tell taxpayers that simply more funds are needed to improve education. During the 20-year period between 1960 and 1980, spending on education was shooting up while college board scores were going down. If a 600-percent increase in 20 years in school spending could not make America smarter, how much more do we need? The Democrats' predictable answer is, "Billions more," of course.
As Commander in Chief, I can say to you America is more secure than she was 3 years ago. I've heard it from generals and I've heard it from privates, that once again it's an honor to be in our military. We have an abundance of applicants with more education than ever before. Morale, discipline, and unit cohesion have improved dramatically. Training and retention are up. Maintenance backlogs are being reduced. Combat readiness rates have surged. New equipment is being added to our inventory. Our military is once more becoming shipshape.
I believe that we share a sacred responsibility, all of us, to maintain the opportunity and freedom we've enjoyed and to pass it on to future generations. Americans of Hispanic descent understand completely the traditional values of work, of family, of freedom, and of God. That's why I'm so supportive of VIVA 84, your grassroots Hispanic voter education and registration drive, conceived by Dr. del Junco.
No, the proposal is for people to go and be the same kind of missionaries and see if they cannot explain democracy. One of the first meetings we had in connection with that was here in this room in which people from all over the world came, and it was a session during our election year to tell them about elections and how legitimate elections could he won; not those kind where you've only got one person to vote for and you'd better vote for him or somebody'll come and get you. And it's an education program, the idea of worldwide—and pointing out the differences that those countries that have chosen—new countries, whether it's Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea—those countries that have chosen our idea, our way instead of statism, authoritarianism or totalitarianism. Their living standard, their prosperity, their freedom for their people is so much greater than anything the other countries have. We just want to explain to people how it works.
The President. Well, I wouldn't say that you don't have representation in government. You know, we have a number of programs, and this, while it is not exactly connected with the Government, it certainly gives you access to government. But we try to represent all of the people in the country. And I think that the things that we do through education and through all of those who deal with you is comparable to an actual representation by youth.
The participants were part of the CloseUp Foundation program, a nonpartisan educational foundation providing secondary school students opportunities to study the American political system.
Today the partnerships with schools—we call attention at the national level to the problem in education, and suddenly business groups, communities, organizations are forming partnerships with schools throughout the country to help in whatever way they can. Name it, and the people, themselves; are finding an answer for it.
