Now, there are those that claim that we've cut social security and medicare benefits, and I have to tell you whenever I hear that, it sort of touches my temperature control. [Laughter] Nothing could be further from the truth. Our budget for this year provides for $238 billion in programs that affect the elderly, which averages out to $17,000 for every senior couple in America.
Since we took office social security benefits for the average retired couple have gone up about $180 a month. Medicare benefits are higher than ever before. Even after adjusting for inflation, our administration is giving America's senior citizens more social security, medicare, and other benefits than they've ever received, and we will not betray those entitled to social security or medicare benefits. And just as we put social security on a firm footing, we'll also put medicare on a sound financial basis. So, the next time you hear someone claim otherwise, you tell them an Irishman named Reagan says they're full of blarney. [Laughter]
Now, we have also added—we are covering them now for Medicare. They do not have such coverage. And with all the talk about whether medicare is being increased in cost or not, or participation—which it is in our proposed budget—no one has added that we are adding to that, for the first time, catastrophic care; that these people will now be protected against that catastrophic illness or injury that now and then totally devastates a family because there's no way that any individual could meet the cost.
Health care costs are not just the concern of the sick in our society. Everyone is affected. The taxpayer picks up the tab for 40 percent of all hospital bills, mainly through medicaid and medicare. Because of rising costs, the poor on medicaid have seen their coverage reduced as States make cutbacks. Because of the increased cost of health insurance, employees have received lower cash wages. Consumers have paid higher prices for goods and services, since the costs of employee health benefits must be included in the price of products. And the elderly who are covered by medicare face the threat of catastrophic illness expense, against which medicare offers no protection.
Don't get me wrong. It's not bad to spend money on health care, far from it. The Nation's high level of health expenditures is testimony to our people's compassion. We can't and we will not scrimp on the health of America's citizens. But on the subject of compassion, let me clear something up. In spite of all the stories you hear on television—and I would turn flips down the halls of the White House if this next statement made the evening news— [laughter] —the truth is that this / Administration, in 1984, will devote more money to health care than any / Administration in history. That probably surprises you. But 49 million elderly, poor, and disabled persons—one out of every five Americans—will have health care needs met through medicare and medicaid in 1984. That's a million more than this year and 3 million more than in 1980.
Back in 1847 a group of 250 physicians convened in Philadelphia to establish this American Medical Association. Well, I'm going to tell you what I told them. [Laughter] We have the best health care in the world, because it has remained private. And, working together, we'll keep it that way. The Government plays a role, of course. I believe medicare and medicaid have filled genuine needs in our society. But our Federal health care system was designed backward. The incentives have not been to save, but to spend. medicare and Medicaid costs have gone up nearly 600 percent since 1970. For too long, the Federal Government has had a blank cheek mentality. The hospital simply filled in the amount they wanted and then Uncle Sam, or, to be more precise, the hard-pressed American taxpayer paid the bill.
Today, for example, medicare payments for treating a heart attack can average $1,500 at one hospital and $9,000 at another, with no apparent difference in quality. Likewise, medicare payments for hip replacements can vary from $2,100 to $8,200. And payments for cataract removal can vary from $450 to $2,800.
Medicare cost-sharing has often seemed backward as well. Under current law, unbelievable as it seems, medicare hospital coverage can actually expire in the event of catastrophic illness—just when it's needed most. And even when the coverage has not expired, those in a hospital with stays for 60 days must make every high, out-of-pocket payment. In contrast, those with shorter hospital stays pay nothing out-of-pocket after the first day. It's cheaper for the patient to be at the hospital than at home.
We also propose limiting the current tax subsidy for high-priced health plans. Most employer contributions for employee health benefits should be tax free because this encourages employee health insurance. Our plan would simply cap this tax-free treatment in order to correct the bias toward high-priced first dollar coverage. Health insurance should cover hepatitis and whooping cough, not hiccups. The proposed cap is an effort to make the tax law neutral in the choice between added wages and added health benefits. The Bible tells us that in creating the universe God made order out of chaos. Well, at times I think even the Almighty would have His hands full making orders out of the regulatory tangles that afflict our health care system. But our reforms are a conscientious start. Some of these reforms, such as prospective pricing, catastrophic coverage, and capping tax-free health insurance, many of you either support or remain flexible. And I want to thank you for these positions. I realize that other of our reforms, such as medicare vouchers or competitive bidding, many of you don't support.
Well, I'd like to explain an additional proposal you don't support—the 1-year freeze on medicare physician reimbursement. These payments have been increasing at highly inflationary rates. In 1982 they increased 21 percent and are expected to rise 19 percent more in 1983. Now we believe physicians, too, must share the burden of slowing the rise in health care costs. As the patient in the movie often says, "Give it to me straight, Doc." Well, we believe the straight answer is that a 1-year freeze is painful but necessary medicine.
As most of you know, our bipartisan commission on social security recommended, and the Congress adopted, a landmark bill setting the social security system on a sound financial footing. At the same time, the Congress granted our request for the first major overhaul of the medicare program which provides health insurance protection for retired and disabled Americans.
Before our returns [reforms], the medicare laws required that we pay hospitals on a cost-plus basis, footing the bill for whatever cost they wound up incurring in treating medicare patients. So, hospitals had little incentive to hold down costs. Under our new reforms, hospitals will be paid a fixed price to care for each illness. If they control costs, they'll retain sufficient funds to upgrade the quality of their care. We estimate these reforms will save taxpayers over $20 billion in the next 5 years, and the savings can be realized without taking benefits away from anyone.
Now, there are those that claim that we've cut social security and medicare benefits, and I have to tell you whenever I hear that, it sort of touches my temperature control. [Laughter] Nothing could be further from the truth. Our budget for this year provides for $238 billion in programs that affect the elderly, which averages out to $17,000 for every senior couple in America.
Since we took office social security benefits for the average retired couple have gone up about $180 a month. Medicare benefits are higher than ever before. Even after adjusting for inflation, our administration is giving America's senior citizens more social security, medicare, and other benefits than they've ever received, and we will not betray those entitled to social security or medicare benefits. And just as we put social security on a firm footing, we'll also put medicare on a sound financial basis. So, the next time you hear someone claim otherwise, you tell them an Irishman named Reagan says they're full of blarney. [Laughter]
Mr. Weisman. Mr. President, on the entitlements, can you be more specific about how this restructuring—it is a year in which you're asking voters to return you to office. Can't you be more specific about what you would do for medicare and social security?
Mr. Weisman. But let me take one more pass at this. Do you think, then, in a second term, should you win reelection, that you will want to take another look at these structural problems in social security, as well as medicare?
And last, I want to mention the economy. Here, again, we in this administration are acting with energy and determination. We've helped disadvantaged and dislocated workers by enacting the Job Training Partnership Act. Indeed, in our last budget, I requested $3.6 billion for the JTPA, money that during 1985 will serve some 2.2 million individuals. We've supported minority businesses, establishing a program that over the next 10 years will call for the purchase of $22 billion in goods and services by the Government from minority firms. For the truly needy, we've enlarged the safety net, increasing spending for such items as medicare and medicaid and food stamps and housing.
Well, as we've worked to promote economic growth we've made certain that the safety net for the truly needy has remained in place. Indeed, after correcting for inflation, under our administration average food stamp payments, medicare payments, medicaid payments, have all risen. We can and are promoting economic vitality, while showing the disadvantaged genuine compassion.
But we are talking some proposals. But right now what we're talking is leaning on the medical field—doctors' fees, hospital costs, and so forth—as to having a fixed rate there for medicare patients. They've been a part of—
