Well, I think that our immigration policy is perhaps going to give us a better handle on that and put us back in a position of being able to control our own borders. You know that we've issued orders with regard to the interception of some who are not truly refugees, in the sense that we take those people who are fearing persecution and death in their own lands. We have been trying to diversify and spread the people that do come in, and that we take in to other areas of the country. But I believe that basically, the problem—that we'll get a handle on it with the new immigration program if the Congress will support us on that.
The President. The immigration bill that is—and well, how do I say this—because this bill was passed. I don't know exactly what I should say, except that it was passed with the intention that we had lost control of our borders, all of them, and that we had to restore the ability to determine immigration to our country here.
Whether we have plugged all the holes or not, I don't know. Whether we have met some of the needs of our neighbors, I don't know. But I know it's a problem that we had to move on to find a solution. And that was evidenced in the last great invasion of people that were not just political refugees but people that .just wanted to live in the United States. And we do have an immigration system and quotas and so forth. And this is trying to regain control of our own borders.
Mr. Cronkite. Illegal immigration is one of the major problems we have in the country today, and the congressional task force has just come in with a study on it. One of its recommendations, besides putting responsibility on employers not to hire illegal aliens, is to provide some means of identification for the aliens so that the employer will know who he's hiring. Would you support some form of national identification that could help attack this problem?
The President. Well, now, I'm very intrigued by a program that's been suggested by several border State Governors and their counterparts in the Mexican States on the other side of the border. They have met together on this problem. We have to remember we have a neighbor and a friendly nation on an almost 2,000-mile border down there. And they have an unemployment rate that is far beyond anything—a safety valve has to be some of that that we're calling "illegal immigration" right now. What these Governors have come up with—and I'm very intrigued with it—is a proposal that we and the Mexican Government get together and legalize this and grant visas, because it is to our interest also that that safety valve is not shut off and that we might have a breaking of the stability south of the border.
Well, I think that our immigration policy is perhaps going to give us a better handle on that and put us back in a position of being able to control our own borders. You know that we've issued orders with regard to the interception of some who are not truly refugees, in the sense that we take those people who are fearing persecution and death in their own lands. We have been trying to diversify and spread the people that do come in, and that we take in to other areas of the country. But I believe that basically, the problem—that we'll get a handle on it with the new immigration program if the Congress will support us on that.
Mr. Cronkite. Illegal immigration is one of the major problems we have in the country today, and the congressional task force has just come in with a study on it. One of its recommendations, besides putting responsibility on employers not to hire illegal aliens, is to provide some means of identification for the aliens so that the employer will know who he's hiring. Would you support some form of national identification that could help attack this problem?
The President. Well, now, I'm very intrigued by a program that's been suggested by several border State Governors and their counterparts in the Mexican States on the other side of the border. They have met together on this problem. We have to remember we have a neighbor and a friendly nation on an almost 2,000-mile border down there. And they have an unemployment rate that is far beyond anything—a safety valve has to be some of that that we're calling "illegal immigration" right now. What these Governors have come up with—and I'm very intrigued with it—is a proposal that we and the Mexican Government get together and legalize this and grant visas, because it is to our interest also that that safety valve is not shut off and that we might have a breaking of the stability south of the border.
Well, I think that our immigration policy is perhaps going to give us a better handle on that and put us back in a position of being able to control our own borders. You know that we've issued orders with regard to the interception of some who are not truly refugees, in the sense that we take those people who are fearing persecution and death in their own lands. We have been trying to diversify and spread the people that do come in, and that we take in to other areas of the country. But I believe that basically, the problem—that we'll get a handle on it with the new immigration program if the Congress will support us on that.
The President. Well, we've been dealing with a reform of the immigration laws on all of this, except that with regard to the refugees—people who are fleeing persecution and who, if they were made to return to their own country, would probably face death or imprisonment—I think that our traditions—there's no way that we can abandon those traditions or the words that are on the base of the Statue of Liberty. And we have a particular problem, I know, with our neighbor to the South. But we think that this program is going to meet our needs and the needs of the refugees coming in, so that we won't be abandoning that. We are also looking at how we can handle these and probably a fairer distribution in our country.
The President. The immigration bill that is—and well, how do I say this—because this bill was passed. I don't know exactly what I should say, except that it was passed with the intention that we had lost control of our borders, all of them, and that we had to restore the ability to determine immigration to our country here.
Whether we have plugged all the holes or not, I don't know. Whether we have met some of the needs of our neighbors, I don't know. But I know it's a problem that we had to move on to find a solution. And that was evidenced in the last great invasion of people that were not just political refugees but people that .just wanted to live in the United States. And we do have an immigration system and quotas and so forth. And this is trying to regain control of our own borders.
The Chancellor. Mr. President, I consider it to be a most happy coincidence that today, on my first visit to the United States as Federal Chancellor, President Reagan has announced the appointment of a special commission on the tricentennial of German-American relations. What we will be commemorating together next year is not merely the immigration of 13 families from the German city of Krefeld. We will also be celebrating an intensive and fruitful relationship of give and take between Germany and America extending over three centuries.
Looking beyond the economy, there are several other pieces of unfinished business which must also be addressed in this final session of the 97th Congress. The priorities I outlined to the leaders this morning included the following: the Caribbean Basin Initiative, which is so important to our relations with our neighbors to the south and which I'll be discussing with them in the next few days; and of great importance, I'm asking that the Congress provide funding so that our MX program can begin on schedule. Then there is the Clean Air Act, nuclear waste disposal, a revision of our bankruptcy laws, regulatory reform and immigration reform, Radio Marti, and the anticrime bill already passed by the Senate.
This year has special significance. We celebrate the 300th anniversary of the first German immigration to America. Those first families—or settlers, I should say, were 13 families from the Rhineland. They were followed by millions of their countrymen, men, women, and children who became a strong thread running through the fabric of America. German Americans have meant so much to the development of this nation. And today German-American friendship is vital to the security and freedom of both our peoples.
And it also became clear to me at Yale as to what constitutes the real strengths of the American nation; namely, the conviction of its citizens that there are basic values which precede every and any governmental system. Among these values rank the dignity of man, justice, and freedom, and also something which you, Mr. President, have repeatedly stressed; namely, trust in God. This has been true from the beginning, and the tricentennial of the first German immigration into North America marks an appropriate moment for recalling it.
The President. I am going to try and get, and have been supportive of, some immigration legislation for a long time. This country has lost control of its own borders, and no country can sustain that kind of position.
The President. Well, yes, there is a policy in this country. First of all, the policy on immigration is that, as you know, there are quotas. We know we can't take everyone. So people are on waiting lists from various countries, depending on how much of their quota has been used for direct immigration.
We have legislation, however, in the Congress right now, that we've been trying to get passed—and we've had trouble getting it passed—having to do with this entire problem and with immigration and trying to close our borders, or control our borders, I should say, against those who are neither immigrants or refugees and who just come into the country and suddenly disappear into the whole population. But we have to a certain extent lost control of our borders. There are a great many illegal migrants coming into our country, and we're trying with this legislation to restore it to legal immigration and at the same time keep the door open for those refugees.
The President. Well, we have what we think is a sensible program for immigration. There's no question but that our country has really, in fact, lost control of its own borders. And we have a program, and it's up there before the Congress, and so far they haven't let it out of committee, I understand. And we're going to keep pressing for it until we get it. And we're going to have, I think, policies in that legislation that are consistent with the words on the base of the Statue of Liberty and yet will give us control.
International cooperation, the second element of our plan, has long been a guiding principle of the United States space program. The tricentennial of the first German immigration to America was celebrated last year with a joint space effort. Just as our friends were asked to join us in the shuttle program, our friends and allies will be invited to join with us in the space station project.
Second, we're committed to ongoing international cooperation, long a principle of the American space program. Last year, for example, we celebrated the tricentennial of the first German immigration to America with a joint American-German space project. And such cooperation will grow in importance as more and more activities take place in space.
It's sometimes forgotten that the Irish ethnic tradition in American society historically has had two strands. The better known today is the predominantly Roman Catholic tradition of the immigration that swelled to huge proportions after the great famine of the 1840's. A strong tradition, indeed, it was, and still is the deep and positive influence in American society.
The immigration legislation that's now being debated on the Hill is also important to you and, I know, is a source of concern to some of you. Well, let me assure you, I will insist that any immigration legislation passed by the Congress provides for fair and effective enforcement.
The President. Well, I know that there are people—I can understand their concern and their fear. I think that if we take every precaution we can in that immigration bill to make sure that there is not discrimination simply based on the not wanting to bother as to whether an individual is legal or not, I think we can protect against that.
Mr. McDonough. Mr. President, a final question. Some Florida farmers feel the new immigration law passed by Congress puts too much responsibility on them for enforcement of the law and not enough on the Federal Government. In the words of one Florida farmer, "The Government hasn't been able to control the borders for the last 50 years; now it expects us to do it." How do you respond to that?
Mr. Scott. Mr. President, David Scott [of KMOL-TV] here. Thanks for being with us.
The President. Well, it's a great pleasure. Mr. Scott. The Simpson-Mazzoli immigration bill—a lot of folks down here in Texas don't like it for a lot of different reasons. Some people say it handles illegals in an arbitrary fashion, that it will produce discrimination against legal Hispanics here, that it's going to hurt businessmen, that it's going to be costly, that it won't be effective. Do you think it's fair? Do you think it's balanced? Do you think it's cost-effective?
Ms. Daniels, Hello, Mr. President. This is Deborah Daniels at KSAT in San Antonio. The President. How do you do. Ms. Daniels. I'd like to ask you about the Simpson-Mazzoli bill. It's created a lot of controversy here in south Texas—we're so close to Mexico. A lot of people don't like it. How do you feel about it, and do you think it's going to solve our immigration problem?
2 A woman later identified as Felicia Ughanze, of Nigeria, was attempting to hand the President a letter describing difficulties she and her husband were having with immigration procedures. A Secret Service agent accepted the letter, and the President later asked an assistant to look into the problem.
Ms. Geyer. Mr. Mondale, many analysts are now saying that actually our number one foreign policy problem today is one that remains almost totally unrecognized: massive illegal immigration from economically collapsing countries. They are saying that it is the only real territorial threat to the American nation-state. You, yourself, said in the 1970's that we had a "hemorrhage on our borders." Yet today you have backed off any immigration reform, such as the balanced and highly crafted Simpson-Mazzoli bill. Why? What would you do instead today, if anything?
Ms. Geyer. Sir, people as well-balanced and just as Father Theodore Hesburgh at Notre Dame, who headed the select commission on immigration, have pointed out repeatedly that there will be no immigration reform without employer sanctions, because it would be an unbalanced bill, and there would be simply no way to enforce it. However, putting that aside for the moment, your critics have also said repeatedly that you have not gone along with the bill or with any immigration reform because of the Hispanic groups—or Hispanic leadership groups—who actually do not represent what the Hispanic-Americans want, because polls show that they overwhelmingly want some kind of immigration reform. Can you say, or how can you justify your position on this? And how do you respond to the criticism that this is another, or that this is an example of your flip-flopping and giving in to special interest groups at the expense of the American nation?
And this was why the provisions that we had in with regard to sanctions, and so forth—and I'm going to do everything I can, and all of us in the administration are, to join in again when Congress is back at it to get an immigration bill that will give us, once again, control of our borders.
The President. No. As a matter of fact, the population explosion, if you look at the actual figures, has been vastly exaggerated—over exaggerated. As a matter of fact, there are some pretty scientific and solid figures about how much space there still is in the world and how many more people we can have. It's almost like going back to the Malthusian theory, when even then they were saying that everyone would starve with the limited population they had then. But the problem of population growth is one, here, with regard to our immigration. And we have been the safety valve, whether we wanted to or not, with the illegal entry here, in Mexico, where their population is increasing and they don't have an economy that can absorb them and provide the jobs. And this is what we're trying to work out, not only to protect our own borders but to have some kind of fairness and recognition of that problem.
Mr. Mondale. One of the biggest problems today is that the countries to our south are so desperately poor that these people who will almost lose their lives if they don't come north, come north despite all the risks. And if we're going to find a permanent, fundamental answer to this, it goes to American economic and trade policies that permit these nations to have a chance to get on their own two feet and to get prosperity, so that they can have jobs for themselves and their people. And that's why this enormous national debt, engineered by this administration, is harming these countries in fueling this immigration. These high interest rates—real rates that have doubled under this administration—have had the same effect on Mexico and so on, and the cost of repaying those debts is so enormous that it results in massive unemployment, hardship, and heartache. And that drives our friends to the south up into our region, and we need to end those deficits as well.
The President. Well, my rebuttal is I've heard the national debt blamed for a lot of things, but not for illegal immigration across our border— [laughter] —and it has nothing to do with it.
Mr. Descalzi. Mr. President, another very important issue for Hispanic Americans is that of immigration. As you know, there have been attempts in the past at immigration reform. This is the third time that Senator Simpson is pushing his own version of immigration reform through Congress—and Congressmen Rodino and Mazzoli in the House—do you support this? Are you behind this attempt? Would you sign into law a Simpson-Rodino-Mazzoli bill if it comes to be?
The President. I have to say that, beginning back in 1981, I supported the principle of reform in our immigration laws because we, in a way, have lost control of our borders. Right now, I have to say with regard to the Simpson bill that—and we've informed of this—that we support generally his bill, but there are some amendments that we think are necessary. For one, we very much need in any immigration bill-we need protection for people who are in this country and who have not become citizens, for example, that they are protected and legitimized and given permanent residency here. And we want to see some things of that kind added to the immigration bill.
The President. I hope we're going to have the thing that is now before the Congress. We tried with their previous effort. It is true that our borders are getting out of control—or are out of control, and we do need an immigration program. And we're still trying to get it through the Congress.
The President. Oh, I'm supporting the immigration bill because I think we have to have rules and regulations, and I think what that bill is meant to correct is some loss of control at our borders, where illegal immigration is threatening us now. No, we have to have control and have had; it's been traditional in our country for many years. And I agree with that, and I agree with the part of the legislation which says that some people—even if they did illegally enter the country in times past—have established themselves, have been law-abiding, raised children, and so forth here—that there should be a provision whereby their status can be made legal and permanent.
Well, I don't suggest that it's impossible to improve relations with the Soviet Union or the other Communist regimes. Progress was made that we can build on when I met General Secretary Gorbachev in Geneva. But, however, wishful thinking is not the way to a better world. Meaningful progress can be realized by facing our differences, not glossing them over. Human rights and humanitarian issues cannot be ignored or trivialized. We care about those people, those separated families, who are now brutally cut off from contact with wives or husbands and relatives. We share their suffering, and we will not forget them or ignore their plight. I believe the Soviet Union wants better relations. Well, let's begin, then, by loosening restrictions on travel and personal contacts between our peoples. And in Geneva we talked about that. It's time to see the follow-through, to see deeds now, not words. Opening up immigration and travel would be demonstrable progress with little cost and little risk. Our goal is not just to live in peace with the Soviet Union but that all mankind live in freedom. And peace is an outgrowth of freedom.
The President. Cuba's rulers, who show no willingness to tolerate a dissenting thought in their own domain, have never been so out of step as they are now with trends in the hemisphere, where freedom and human rights are ascendant. Their Communist economic model has proven a dismal failure with a drop in per capita income under Castro's rule from among the highest in the hemisphere to among the lowest. In foreign policy, Cuba shows itself dedicated first and foremost to the Soviet alliance. Among its neighbors and as far away as Africa it sows violence and discord. There is little prospect of any significant improvement in our relations with such a Cuba. Yet despite these fundamental differences, we remain prepared to resolve specific issues, such as immigration, if Cuba is willing. Unfortunately, Cuba unilaterally suspended the one agreement we did reach and showed insufficient resolve to make progress during recent talks with our representatives in Mexico City.
This bill, the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, that I will sign in a few minutes is the most comprehensive reform of our immigration laws since 1952. It's the product of one of the longest and most difficult legislative undertakings in the last three Congresses. Further, it's an excellent example of a truly successful bipartisan effort. The administration and the allies of immigration reform on both sides of the Capitol and both sides of the aisle worked together to accomplish these critically important reforms to control illegal immigration.
In 1981 this administration asked the Congress to pass a comprehensive legislative package, including employer sanctions, other measures to increase enforcement of the immigration laws, and legalization. The act provides these three essential components. Distance has not discouraged illegal immigration to the United States from all around the globe. The problem of illegal immigration should not, therefore, be seen as a problem between the United States and its neighbors. Our objective is only to establish a reasonable, fair, orderly, and secure system of immigration into this country and not to discriminate in any way against particular nations or people.
But some of the influence has also been in the other direction. During the last century, more than a million Swedes came to this country, and most of them came to stay and start a new life here, bringing with them a part of Sweden to this land. You will still remember many of them. One is Carl Sandburg, the son of a Swedish immigrant who became one of America's greatest poets. Another is Jenny Lind, a much-loved Swedish singer who toured this country for several years in the 19th century. The aviator Charles Lindbergh was the grandson of a Swedish farmer. And if we look at the most recent wave of immigration, we find that there are no less than 22 Swedish players in the teams of the National Hockey League. [Laughter]
Our administration has insisted from the first upon dealing with the Soviets in each of four crucial areas. Human rights is one. Human rights, after all, is what our nation is all about. In this area, we've seen a certain amount of progress: Some political prisoners in the Soviet Union have been released, immigration rates have seen a slight rise, and there's been talk about granting the Soviet peoples some very limited new economic freedoms. Yet all of this remains much, much too little, and human rights will remain on my agenda when I meet Mr. Gorbachev.
The President. Well, we've been doing things of that kind and helped, and that's involved in our immigration plan. But again, I have to say that—because as a Governor I found so many times that when the Federal Government tried to help it couldn't do as well as the State could have done if we had been left alone. So, I am not going to make a snap answer here.
The President. No, but I do know that he and others have had a feeling that in some way our concern with this is interfering with your internal government policies. I have explained to him, and I think maybe he has seen the point. Our country is very unique. All of us, either by ourselves or through our ancestors or our grandparents or parents, came from someplace else-about the only nation in the world that can say that. As a matter of fact, the estimate is that one out of eight Americans trace their parentage and their heritage, if not their own immigration, to the Eastern bloc.
The President. And now if you will present to your wife also this medal. And we know about the work that she was doing all during those years when you were there. Natan Shcharanskiy and Mrs. Shcharanskiy are Israeli citizens now—their immigration to Israel. There is the medal for your
The President. I am going to try and get, and have been supportive of, some immigration legislation for a long time. This country has lost control of its own borders, and no country can sustain that kind of position.
The President. Well, yes, there is a policy in this country. First of all, the policy on immigration is that, as you know, there are quotas. We know we can't take everyone. So people are on waiting lists from various countries, depending on how much of their quota has been used for direct immigration.
We have legislation, however, in the Congress right now, that we've been trying to get passed—and we've had trouble getting it passed—having to do with this entire problem and with immigration and trying to close our borders, or control our borders, I should say, against those who are neither immigrants or refugees and who just come into the country and suddenly disappear into the whole population. But we have to a certain extent lost control of our borders. There are a great many illegal migrants coming into our country, and we're trying with this legislation to restore it to legal immigration and at the same time keep the door open for those refugees.
