This generation—this generation was given the gift of the best education in American history, yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book. And still this administration continues on the same old path, the same old programs, while millions are trapped in schools where violence is common and learning is rare.
On education, too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade to grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge. This is discrimination, pure and simple, the soft bigotry of low expectations. And our nation...[applause]
When these problems are not confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth, technology, education and ambition. On the other side of that wall are poverty and prison, addiction and despair. And my fellow Americans, we must tear down that wall.
This generation was given the gift of the best education in American history. Yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of ten fourth-graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book.
On education ... Too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade-to-grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge.
When these problems aren't confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth and technology, education and ambition.
I've told the leadership that they should be expecting a strong education reform package, a tax relief package, and a Medicare and Social Security reform package and a package to help pay the folks in the military more money. And I can't wait to work with them to get the people's business done.
The President. We support abstinence education and crisis pregnancy programs and parental notification laws. We offer compassionate alternatives to abortion by promoting adoption and extending State health care coverage for unborn children.
During the last 2 years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we work together. To lift the standards of our public schools, we achieved historic education reform, which must now be carried out in every school and in every classroom so that every child in America can read and learn and succeed in life. To protect our country, we reorganized our Government and created the Department of Homeland Security, which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era. To bring our economy out of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a generation. To insist on integrity in American business, we passed tough reforms, and we are holding corporate criminals to account.
Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs. Addiction crowds out friendship, ambition, moral conviction and reduces all the richness of life to a single destructive desire. As a government, we are fighting illegal drugs by cutting off supplies and reducing demand through antidrug education programs. Yet for those already addicted, the fight against drugs is a fight for their own lives. Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it. So tonight I propose a new $600 million program to help an additional 300,000 Americans receive treatment over the next 3 years.
Secondly, I believe the Iraqi people are appreciative of the reconstruction efforts. The small-business owners, who are all of a sudden beginning to realize there's a market developing, appreciate that. The mothers who send their children to the over 1,500 schools we've refurbished appreciate that. There are going to be new textbooks coming which no longer glorify the tyrant Saddam Hussein but glorify basic education or at least promote basic education. They will be there. I think the people of Iraq appreciate what is taking place inside the country.
The President. Well, that's exactly the point I made to the Members of Congress who have come here to the White House to talk about loans or grants. I said, "Let's don't burden Iraq with loans. The only thing they'll be able to repay their loans with is oil." And hopefully, we'll get a good solution out of the Congress on this issue. We're making progress. We're working hard with the Members to make the case that it's very important for us not to saddle Iraq with a bunch of debt early in its—in the emergence of a market-oriented economy, an economy that has been wrecked by Mr. Saddam Hussein. I mean, he just destroyed their economy and destroyed their infrastructure, destroyed their education system, destroyed their medical system, all to keep himself in power. He was the ultimate——
Before I begin, I do want to talk a little bit about a meeting I just attended. Rend al-Rahim is here—she's the representative from the Iraqi Government, the interim Government, to the United States—as well as Dr. Khadir Abbas, who is the interim Minister of Health. We just had an interesting discussion in the Roosevelt Room about the health needs of Iraq, about the future of the health care system in Iraq. And we were joined by doctors, Iraqi doctors who were anxious to work with theirfellow counterparts here in America to enhance educational opportunities and to get caught up on the latest technologies in health care. The thing that struck me about the meeting was the kind of joy that they expressed about being free. It was a touching meeting, and I want to thank you all for coming.
But we all know there is still more to do. Earlier this week, I proposed that we double Federal funding for abstinence education programs. We will continue to support crisis pregnancy centers, adoption, parental notification laws, and the vital work of faith-based groups.
Here at home, we're pursuing an agenda to help more citizens realize the promise of this country. That's why we've passed major tax relief to help our Nation's families and to create new jobs for American workers. We've passed education reform that gives parents more choices and makes sure every single child has the opportunity to learn.
If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your children with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of the education right here in Marquette, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you are responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves.
Thanks for your hospitality. I'm traveling our country asking for the vote. I think you have to go out and ask people for their help and ask people for their support. I've got a reason for running again—I'm going to share some of that with you today. We're going to do it in a little different way. We're going to talk about small businesses. We'll talk about homeownership. We're going to talk about jobs and education, all aimed to let the people know that I have a desire to make sure this country is a stronger country and a better country for everybody—por todos.
The President. Yes, let me stop you there. One of the real challenges we have in our country to make sure jobs stay here is to educate people, is to make sure the education system works. You just heard what—it's a new business, new business. He says that we pay twice as much as the average income, but we require high-level skills. You know what that says to me? It says to me that we've got to make sure No Child Left Behind works. We've got to make sure we keep raising the bar, make sure the young kids can read and write and add and subtract early, before it's too late. We've got to make sure our community colleges are able to train workers for the jobs of the 21st century, so that Eclipse can find a workforce necessary to make this company fly.
And so the No Child Left Behind Act sets high expectations and high standards. It believes in local control of schools. It believes in empowering parents. But it also says, "Let's measure to determine whether curriculum works, to determine whether or not our children are learning to read." And if not, let's correct the problem before it is too late. And we're making good progress. These test scores are beginning to rise. The achievement gap is beginning to close. And what I'm telling you is there's more work to do when it comes to the education. I want the high school diploma to mean something. We need to focus on math and science to make sure our youngsters have the skills necessary to compete in this world. I like to tell people we've— we're getting the job done when it comes to our schools. And by making our schools work, America will be a better place.
Finally, let me talk about two quick things, and then we're going to talk to some of your fellow citizens here. One, education is really important for workers. If we want to keep jobs here in America, we better have a system that enables people to become retrained for the jobs which exist. That's why I'm a big backer of the community college system, and it's a system that's working. It's a system that is available and affordable. They're everywhere, at reasonable price, and there's plenty of Government aid to help.
So I travel the country a lot. And let me tell you an interesting story. I met a lady in Phoenix, Arizona, went to Mesa Community College. She had worked for 12 years as a graphic artist. She decided to go back to college, got a little help to do so, went back and got an associates degree. And her—in other words, she enhanced her skills. And her first job out of the community college paid more in her first year than she was making in her 12th year as a graphic artist. In other words, what education does is it makes you a more productive worker. And Government has got to encourage people to go back to community college by helping them to do so.
The President. There you go. [Laughter] All education begins at home, by the way.
The President. Isn't that something? Community colleges are great. I'll tell you something really interesting. Think about the attractiveness of the community college system: Curriculum change if need be. In other words, if there's a demand for workers, the community college can change curriculum or adapt curriculum or come up with curriculum necessary to train those workers for the jobs which actually exist. And all of a sudden, here you have an employer that says, "I'm going to be creative. I'm going to work with the local education institute to help people get the skills necessary to actually work."
No Child Left Behind Act—I voted for it. I support it. I support the goals. But the President has underfunded it by $28 billion. Right here in St. Louis, you've laid off 350 teachers. You're 150—excuse me, I think it's a little more—about $100 million shy of what you ought to be under the No Child Left Behind Act to help your education system here. So I complain about that. I've argued that we should fully fund it. The President says I've changed my mind. I haven't changed my mind. I'm going to fully fund it. So these are the differences.
I want to fully fund education, No Child Left Behind, special needs education. And that's how we're going to be more competitive, by making sure our kids are graduating from school and college. China and India are graduating more graduates in technology and science than we are. We've got to create the products of the future.
Now, I'm going to reverse that. I'm going to change that. We're going to restore the fiscal discipline we had in the 1990s. Every plan that I have laid out, my health care plan, my plan for education, my plan for kids to be able to get better college loans, I've shown exactly how I'm going to pay for those. And we start—we don't do it exclusively, but we start by rolling back George Bush's unaffordable tax cut for the wealthiest people, people earning more than $200,000 a year, and we pass, hopefully, the McCain/Kerry commission, which identified some $60 billion that we can get. We shut the loophole which has American workers actually subsidizing the loss of their own job. They just passed an expansion of that loophole in the last few days, $43 billion of giveaways, including favors to the oil and gas industry and to people importing ceiling fans from China.
I'm going to stand up and fight for the American worker, and I'm going to do it in a way that's fiscally sound. I show how I pay for the health care, how we pay for the education. I have a manufacturing jobs credit. We pay for it by shutting that loophole overseas. We raise the student loans. I pay for it by changing the relationship with the banks. This President has never once vetoed one bill, the first President in 100 years not to do that.
President Bush. I say, Bob, "I've got policies to continue to grow our economy and create the jobs of the 21st century, and here's some help for you to go get an education. Here's some help for you to go to a community college. We've expanded trade adjustment assistance. We want to help pay for you to gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century."
You know, there's a lot of talk about how to keep the economy growing, and we talk about fiscal matters. But perhaps the best way to keep jobs here in America and to keep this economy growing is to make sure our education system works.
I went to Washington to solve problems. And I saw a problem in the public education system in America. They were just shuffling too many kids through the system, year after year, grade after grade, without learning the basics. And so we said, "Let's raise the standards. We're spending more money, but let's raise the standards and measure early and solve problems now, before it's too late."
You know, education is how to help the person who has lost a job. Education is how to make sure this—we've got a workforce that's productive and competitive. You got—4 more years, I've got more to do to continue to raise standards, to continue to reward teachers and school districts that are working, to emphasize math and science in the classrooms, to continue to expand Pell grants, to make sure that people have an opportunity to start their career with a college diploma.
Senator Kerry. I want you to notice how the President switched away from jobs and started talking about education principally. Let me come back in one moment to that, but I want to speak for a second, if I can, to what the President said about fiscal responsibility. Being lectured by the President on fiscal responsibility is a little bit like Tony Soprano talking to me about law and order in this country. [Laughter]
But let me talk about what's really important for the worker you're referring to, and that's to make sure the education system works, is to make sure we raise standards. Listen, the No Child Left Behind Act is really a jobs act when you think about it. The No Child Left Behind Act says, "We'll raise standards. We'll increase Federal spending, but in return for extra spending, we now want people to measure—States and local jurisdictions to measure, to show us whether or not a child can read or write or add and subtract." You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem, and we weren't diagnosing problems. And therefore, just kids were being shuffled through the school. And guess who would get shuffled through? Children whose parents wouldn't speak English as first language, just moved through; many inner-city kids, just moved through. We've stopped that practice now by measuring early, and when we find a problem, we spend extra money to correct it.
I remember a lady in Houston, Texas, telling me reading is the new civil right. And she's right. In order to make sure people have jobs for the 21st century, we've got to get it right in the education system. And we're beginning to close a minority achievement gap now. You see, we'd never be able to compete in the 21st century unless we have an education system that doesn't quit on children, an education system that raises standards, an education that makes sure there's excellence in every classroom.
Now, right here in Arizona, that difference would have been $131 million to the State of Arizona to help its kids be able to have better education and to lift the property tax burden from its citizens. The President reneged on his promise to fund No Child Left Behind. He will tell you he's raised the money, and he has, but he didn't put in what he promised. And that makes a difference in the lives of our children.
And secondly, only a liberal Senator from Massachusetts would say that a 49-percent increase in funding for education was not enough. We've increased funds, but more importantly, we've reformed the system to make sure that we solve problems early, before they're too late. He talked about the unemployed. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. He talked about children whose parents don't speak English as a first language. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. And that's what the No Child Left Behind Act does.
And secondly, like my opponent, I don't agree we ought to have quotas—I agree, we shouldn't have quotas. But we ought to have an aggressive effort to make sure people are educated, to make sure when they get out of high school there's Pell grants available for them, which is what we've done. We've expanded Pell grants by a million students. Do you realize, today in America, we spend $73 billion to help 10 million low- and middle-income families better afford college? That's the access I believe is necessary, is to make sure every child learns to read, write, add, and subtract early, to be able to build on that education by going to college so they can start their careers with a college diploma.
I enjoyed the debate last night. You know, those debates clarify the differences in our record, our approach, and our plans for the future. I'm proud of my record. My opponent seemed to want to avoid talking about his. [Laughter] My record is one of lowering taxes, reforming education, providing prescription drug coverage to seniors, improving homeland protections, and waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate.
My opponent has a history on education issues, a history of doing almost nothing. [Laughter] The Senator has pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act. He's proposed diluting the accountability standards and looking at measures like teacher attendance to judge whether students are learning. His proposals would undermine the high standards and accountability we worked hard to pass. We've moved beyond the old days of failure and mediocrity and low standards, and we're not going to go back.
I enjoyed the debate last night. You know, these debates clarify the differences in our records, our approaches, and our plans for the future. I'm proud of my record. My opponent seemed to want to avoid talking about his. [Laughter] My record is one of lowering taxes, of reforming education, providing prescription drug coverage to seniors, improving our homeland protections, and waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate.
We had a great debate last night. Those debates, all three debates, clarified the differences in our records, our approaches, and our plans for the future. I'm proud of my record. My opponent seemed to want to avoid talking about his. My record is one of lowering taxes, reforming education, providing prescription drugs to seniors, improving our homeland protection, and waging an aggressive war against the terrorists.
To build a more hopeful America, we must have the best prepared and most highly skilled workforce in the world. Most new jobs are filled by people with at least 2 years of college education, yet only about one in four of our students gets there. So we'll fund early intervention programs in our high schools to help at-risk students. We'll place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous examination before graduation from high school. By raising performance in our high schools and by expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we'll help more Americans start their career with a college diploma.
My opponent has a history on education issues, a history of doing almost nothing. [Laughter] The Senator has pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act.
I enjoyed our debates. I enjoyed standing up there with my opponent, talking about our differences, and we have big differences. We have very different records and different plans for the future. My record is one of reforming education, of lowering taxes, of providing prescription drug coverage for seniors, for improving homeland protections, and for waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate. The Senator's record is 20 years of out-of-the-mainstream votes without many significant reforms or results to show for those 20 years. The records are important because our country faces many challenges, and the next President must recognize the need for reform and must be able to lead to achieve them.
On issue after issue, from jobs to health care to the need to strengthen Social Security, Senator Kerry's policies fail to recognize the changing realities of today's world and the need for fundamental reforms. In our final debate, when I talked about the vital link between education and jobs, the Senator didn't seem to get it. He said I switched away from jobs and started talking about education. No, good jobs start with good education. At a time when most new jobs require at least 2 years of college, I understand that one of the best ways to keep jobs in America is to make sure our workforce is educated, the most highly skilled, the most creative, and the most innovative in the world. That's how we create jobs here in America.
My opponent has a history on education issues—a history of almost doing nothing. The Senator has pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act. He's proposed diluting the accountability standards and looking at measures like teacher attendance to judge whether students are learning. His proposals would undermine the high standards and accountability we worked hard to pass. We've moved beyond the old days of failure and mediocrity and low standards, and we're not going back.
You know, I enjoyed the debates against my opponent, and they showed stark differences between his views and mine. We have different records. We have very different plans for the future. My record is one of reforming education, of lowering taxes, of providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, improving homeland protection, and waging an unrelenting fight against the ideologues of hate.
Those debates were interesting experiences. I enjoyed them. They highlighted the stark differences between my opponent and me. We have very different records and very different plans for the future. My record is one of reforming education, of lowering taxes, of providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, for improving homeland security, and for waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate.
To build a more hopeful America, we must have the best prepared, most highly skilled workforce in the world. See, most new jobs are filled by people with at least 2 years of college education, yet only one in four of our students gets there. That's why we'll fund early intervention programs in our high schools to help at-risk students. We'll emphasize math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance in our high schools and expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, more of our students will start their career with a college diploma.
My opponent has a history on education issues, a history of doing almost nothing. [Laughter] The Senator has pledged to weaken the No Child Left Behind Act.
You know, our debates highlighted the stark differences between Senator Kerry's views and mine. We have different records. We have different plans for the future. My record is one of reforming education, of lowering taxes, of providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, for improving homeland protections, and for waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate.
We have a changing world, and most new jobs are filled by people with at least 2 years of a college education. Yet, only one in four of our students gets there. That's why we will fund early intervention programs at our high schools to help at-risk students. That's why we'll place a new focus on math and science. Over time, we'll require a rigorous exam before graduation. By raising performance in our high schools, by increasing and expanding Pell grants for low- and middle-income families, we will help more Americans start their career with a college diploma.
And our Nation is keeping our commitments to those who serve and to their families. We have increased basic pay in the military by 21 percent since I've been the Commander in Chief. We've increased health benefits and Federal support for schools on bases across the country. We've reduced out-of-pocket expense for off-base housing to zero for our military families. We are supporting our Guard and our Reserve troops and families. We're spending 14 billion for construction and maintenance on Guard and Reserve facilities. We're extending military health benefits to those in the Guard and Reserves. We're increasing—we will increase monthly education benefits for those in the Guard and Reserves.
I enjoyed our debates. They showed the big differences between my opponent and me. We have different records. We have different views of the future. My record is one of reforming education, lowering taxes, providing prescription drug coverage for our seniors, improving homeland protections, and waging an aggressive war against the ideologues of hate.
The third choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. I believe a good education and quality health care are important for successful lives. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools, and I kept my word. We passed good education reform. We're raising the standards. We're making sure our schools are accountable, accountable to our parents. We're seeing progress. Math and reading scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap all across this country. We will build on these reforms. We will extend them to our high schools so that not one single child in America is left behind.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our citizens, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. The decision is in the best hands because the decision belongs to the American people.
The President. The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important for a successful life. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to end and to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations in our schools. I kept my word, passed the No Child Left Behind Act, which is a great piece of legislation. It brings high standards to our classrooms and makes our schools accountable to our parents. We're seeing progress. Math and reading scores are rising. We are closing an achievement gap all across America. We will build on these reforms. We'll extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
All of these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our families, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. And this decision is in the best of hands, because the decision rests with the American people.
Third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I have kept my word. We passed good, sound education reforms to bring high standards to the classroom and make our schools more accountable to parents and teachers. We're seeing progress. Math and reading scores are rising. We're closing the achievement gap by helping minority students. We will build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child in America is left behind.
All of these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security, the prosperity of our country, the education of our children, and the health of our families, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are—all are at stake. And the decision is in the best hands, the hands of the American people.
The President. The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I believe a good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, meaningful education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms and to make schools more accountable to our parents. We're making progress. Math and reading scores are rising. We're closing an achievement gap by helping all students. We will build on these reforms. We will extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our families, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. The decision is in the best hands, because the decision belongs to the American people.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important for a successful life. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, which is bringing high standards to our classrooms and making schools accountable to our parents. We're seeing great progress across this country. Math and reading scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap. More and more Latino youngsters are learning how to read and write and add and subtract. And the country is better off for it. We'll build on these reforms. We'll extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and the education of families, the retirement of our seniors, the direction of our culture are all at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands; it's in the hands of the American people.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations in every school in America, and I kept my word. We passed good reforms. The No Child Left Behind Act has raised standards. It believes in local control of schools. Schools are now more accountable. Our children are learning to read and write and add and subtract. We're closing achievement gaps all across this country for minority students. We'll build on these reforms. We'll extend high standards to our high schools, so that no child is left behind in America.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education for our families, the retirement of our seniors, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands; it's in the hands of the American people.
I want to thank U.S. Senate candidate Tim Michels and his wife, Barbara. You need to put him in the Senate. He's a good man. He's got good values. He'll make you a fine United States Senator. And I'm going to tell you who's going to make you a fine United States Congressman, and that would be Dale Schultz. Appreciate you—Schultz. He's working. He's shaking a lot of hands. He's putting up a lot of signs. I know firsthand. See, I'm taking the bus throughout this part of the world. [Laughter] And I've seen a lot of the signs, and that's a good sign. And I also want to thank Rachel—Rachel Schultz, who happens to be the district superintendent of the schools. And I want to thank you for your—being in education. I want to thank John Cler and all the folks associated with the high school for letting us come here today. I appreciate you coming. I want to thank the students. Thanks for coming, letting me come. All right. Study more than you watch TV. [Laughter] And if you're 18, make sure you vote.
First, I've been talking about a changing world, and it's important that we know the world is changing. In a changing world, jobs change, the nature of jobs change, the skill sets necessary to fill jobs change. That's why education is so vital. That's why we've got to make sure we get it right. The No Child Left Behind Act is a great piece of legislation because we believe in high standards and accountability. We're challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We want to make sure the high school diploma means something. We'll expand Pell grants for lower and middle-income families so more children are able to start their career with a college diploma. I'm a big believer in the community college system, because community colleges are able to devise curriculum for the jobs which actually exist, to be able to help people get the skills necessary to fill the new jobs which are being created.
The third clear choice involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important for our country's families. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed education reform to bring high standards into the classrooms and to make our schools accountable to our parents. We're seeing progress. Math and reading scores are rising. We are closing achievement gaps for minority students all across America. We'll build on these reforms. We'll extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
All of these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country is at stake. The health and education for families are important. The retirement of our seniors, the direction of our culture— they're all at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands; it's in the hands of the American people.
And so the fundamental question in this campaign, who's got the best strategy to make sure the entrepreneurial spirit is strong? Who's got the idea, who understands, and who can best make sure that more small businesses grow in America? First, in order to make sure the entrepreneurial spirit is strong, America must be the best place in the world to do business. If you want businesses to start, this must be the best place in the world to do business. And secondly, to make sure this is a hopeful world, we've got to make sure the workforce is the best trained in the world. A lot of good jobs and a lot of good hopes start with good education.
Let me talk right quick about education, because I believe a good economy requires this workforce of ours to be educated. I think the two go hand in hand. I don't think you can have a hopeful environment for growth if our people aren't educated. It all starts with the younger kids. That's why I went to Washington, to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. You know, this business about just shuffling the children through, grade after grade, year after year, without learning the basics was not good enough for America, as far as I'm concerned. I believe every child can learn, and I believe every school must teach. And so we increased funding, particularly for Title I students. But we said, "In return for extra funding, show us whether or not a child can read and write and add and subtract."
I want to thank Sam McGrew, the superintendent of schools. Appreciate you being here, Mr. Superintendent. I want to remind you, Mr. Superintendent, when it came time to pick a Secretary of Education, I picked a superintendent of schools. And the reason why I did is because I understand local control of schools is important, and I understand a superintendent of a school district understands education firsthand. And I appreciate your service.
A third issue about the quality of our families and the life of our families is education and health care. When I ran for President 4 years ago, I promised to end the soft bigotry of low expectations in our schools. And I kept my word. The No Child Left Behind Act is a good, solid piece of legislation. It says in return for extra Federal money, schools must measure to show us whether or not our children are learning to read and write and add and subtract. You can't solve a problem until you diagnose the problem. And so by measuring early, we're correcting problems before they become too acute, before it is too late. And an achievement gap in America is closing all over America. People are learning to read and write and add and subtract, and we're not going to go back to the old days of mediocrity and low expectations in our schoolhouses.
The President. The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life of our families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. And as President, I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms and to make schools accountable to our parents. We're seeing progress all across America. Math and reading scores are on the rise. Achievement gaps, particularly for minority students, are closing all across our country. We're building on these reforms. We'll extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
The Democratic Party has a tradition of support for our public schools. The party of Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey always stood up for the right of poor and minority children to get the best education America could offer. Many Democrats look at my opponent and wonder where that firm conviction has gone. Just as teachers and principals across America are lifting the sights of our schools and raising the test scores of minority children, my opponent is talking about weakening the standards and going back to the old days of stagnation and excuses for failure.
Third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important for our families. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to our schools. We increased Federal spending, but instead—in return for Federal spending, increases of Federal spending, we said, "Measure. Show us." We believe in accountability. You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose a problem. We are diagnosing and solving problems all across America. Math and reading scores are up. The achievement gap for minority students across our country is closing. We'll extend these kind of reforms and high standards to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
If you are a Democrat who wants America to lead with strength and idealism, I would be honored to have your support. The Democratic party has a tradition for support of our public schools. I think about Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey, who always stood up for the right of the poor and minority children to get the best education America could offer. Many Democrats look at my opponent and wonder where that firm conviction has gone. Just as teachers and principals across America are lifting the sights of our schools and raising the test scores of minority children, my opponent is talking about weakening the standards and going back to the old days of stagnation and excuses for failure.
The third choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important for your future. As a candidate, I pledged to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed a really good piece of reform legislation. We're raising the standards. We've increased Federal spending, but now we're asking for results. We want to measure. See, you can't solve a problem unless you've diagnosed the problem. And we're diagnosing problems all across America, and we're beginning to solve them. Our test scores in reading and math are up. We're closing achievement gaps for minority students all across America. We'll build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in our country.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country, the health and education of our families, the retirement of our citizens, and the direction of our culture are all at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands. It is in the hands of the American people. It is in your hands. You get to decide. And that gives me great confidence.
The third clear choice in this election improves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to end the soft bigotry of low expectations in our schools. And as President, I have kept my word. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, which is an historic achievement for public education. We are raising the standards in our schools. We've increased Federal spending, especially for poor students. But in return for an increase of Federal spending, we're now saying, "Show us whether or not a child can read or write, and add and subtract. Show us whether or not children are becoming literate. Show us whether or not we're ending that practice of just shuffling kids through school, year after year, without learning the basics."
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important to our families. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. I signed the No Child Left Behind Act and proudly so. We're raising the standards. We're spending more money, but in return, we're asking for results. We believe every child can learn, and we expect every school to teach.
Our economy is in the midst of change and challenge. It can be a time of great opportunity if we have the right policies to strengthen rather than stall our economic recovery. We have much more to do to improve our children's education, to make health care more accessible and affordable, to strengthen our Social Security for our children and our grandchildren. And I'm ready for the job.
Now, there's more to do. I'm asking for your vote because I know where I want to lead this country. I see a more hopeful America. I want to work with you to make sure our education system fulfills its promise and to make sure health care is available and affordable without the Federal Government taking it over. I want to make sure we do our duty to younger generations of Americans, and I want to continue to work to spread freedom and liberty so the world is more peaceful.
Our economy is in the midst of change and challenge. It can be a time of great opportunity if we have the right policies to strengthen, rather than stall, the economic recovery. We have more to do to make sure people can find work in places like Ohio, more to do to improve our children's education, more to do to make sure health care is available and affordable, more to do to strengthen Social Security for a generation to come, and I am ready for the job.
There's more work to be done. I'm here to ask for the vote and let you know I want to make sure education systems continue to work. We'll expand the high standards to our high schools and expand Pell grants for low- and middle-income families so more children can start their career with a college degree. We'll continue to expand our economy and create an environment for the entrepreneur to flourish, by keeping your taxes low and doing something about regulations and lawsuits. We're going to make sure that the compassion of America continues to be unleashed through our faith-based and community-based initiatives. And we'll work hard to make sure this country is secure, by not only chasing the terrorists abroad so we do not have to face them here at home but by spreading freedom and liberty.
Our economy is in the midst of change and challenge. It can be a great time of opportunity if we have the right policies that strengthen rather than stall our economic growth. We have much more to do to create jobs, to improve our children's education, to make health care available and affordable, and to strengthen Social Security for our seniors and for generations to come. And I am ready for the job.
The role of a President is to confront problems, not to pass them on to future generations and future Presidents. That is how I have led, and that is how I will continue to lead our great Nation. We will keep your taxes low so this economy continues to grow. We will work on the education reforms and take them to our high schools. We will expand Pell grants for low-and middle-income families so more of our children can start their career with a college degree. We'll make sure that health decisions are made by doctors and patients, not by officials in Washington, DC.
I see a prosperous America where people are able to realize their dreams. I see an education system that challenges our children so that no child is left behind. I see a compassionate health care system run by you, where doctors aren't being sued every day. I see a world that is free and therefore peaceful. I see the peace that we all long for our children and our grandchildren.
Third—the third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As candidate for President, I pledged to end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed good education reforms. We believe every child can learn, and we expect every child, every school to teach. We increased Federal spending. But in return for Federal increases, we now expect State and local jurisdictions to measure. We understand you cannot solve a problem until you diagnose the problem. And we are diagnosing and we are solving problems all across America. Test scores are up in reading and math. We're closing an achievement gap for minority students. And we will not go back to the days of low expectations and mediocrity in our classrooms.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country are at stake. The health of our families is at stake. The education of our children is at stake. And the direction of our culture is at stake. And the decision is in the best of hands. The decision is in the hands of the American people.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed strong education reforms in Washington. We're increasing spending, particularly for low-income students. But in return for increased spending, we're now asking whether or not a child can read or write and add and subtract. See, we realize—or we think every child can learn, and we expect every school to teach.
All these choices make this one of the most important elections in our history. The security and prosperity of our country are at stake. The health and education for our families and our children are at stake. The direction of our culture is at stake. The decision is in the best of hands. It's in the hands of the American people. It's in your hands.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. I worked with Senator Gregg and others, and we passed the No Child Left Behind Act, a fine piece of reform. We're increasing spending at the Federal level, but in return, we're asking for results. See, we believe every child can learn to read and write and add and subtract, and we expect every school to teach. You cannot solve a problem until you diagnose the problem. We're diagnosing the problems all across our country, and the test scores are improving. Scores in reading and math are on the rise, and an achievement gap for minority students is closing. In a new term, we'll build on these reforms. We'll extend them to high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
The third choice in this election involves your quality of life. As President, I signed historic education reforms to bring high standards to the classroom and make schools accountable to parents, and our children are making progress in reading and math. We've strengthened Medicare, created health savings accounts, and expanded community health centers to help more Americans get health care. I'm proposing a series of practical reforms to make health care more affordable and accessible by expanding health savings accounts, allowing association health plans, and protecting patients and doctors from junk and frivolous lawsuits.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our families. That means good education and quality health care. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, which I proudly signed into law. In return for increased Federal spending, we're now expecting results because we believe every child can learn and we expect every school to teach. You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem. And so the new system enables us to diagnose and solve problems. The test scores are on the rise across this country in reading and math. We're closing an achievement gap for minority students all across this country. And we refuse to go back to the days of low standards and mediocrity in our classrooms.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to a successful life. As candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. And I kept my word. I proudly signed the No Child Left Behind Act to raise the standards. See, we believe every child can learn, and we expect every school to teach.
The third clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important for a successful life. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. As President, I kept my word.
The third choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. A good education and quality health care are important to America's families. As a candidate, I pledged to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. I signed the No Child Left Behind Act and proudly so. It's a great piece of legislation. We increased Federal funding for our schools, particularly for the disadvantaged and special-ed kids, and that's important. But also what's important is to measure. We said, "In return for extra money, show us whether our children can read and write and add and subtract," because we believe every child can read and we believe every school must teach.
Second clear choice involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I ran for President to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I have kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms. Reading and math scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap by helping our minority students. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them still to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
My opponent has a different approach. He voted for education reform but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He has proposed a big-Government health care plan. You might remember one of our debates when he looked square in the camera and said—when they asked him about his health care plan, he said, "The Government doesn't have anything to do with it." I could barely contain myself. [Laughter] The Government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people would be signed up to a Government program under his plan. Eight million Americans would lose their private health insurance and end up on a Government program. He's voted against medical liability reform 10 times. He put a personal-injury trial lawyer on the ticket.
The President. The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I ran for President to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to the classroom. Math and reading scores are now on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap for minority children all across this country. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
As you can imagine, my opponent has a different approach. He voted for the education reform but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposing a big-Government health care plan. I don't know if you remember the debate when they said, "Tell us about your health care plan." And one of the things he said was, "The Government doesn't have anything to do with it." I could barely contain myself. [Laughter] The Government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people would end up on the Government plan with his vision. And that is the wrong prescription for American families.
The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I ran for President to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to the classrooms, and reading and math scores are now on the rise. We're closing an achievement gap for minority students all across America. And we're not going to go back to the old days of low expectations and mediocrity.
My opponent has a different approach to these issues. He voted for education reform, but now he wants to weaken the accountability standards.
The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I ran for President to challenge and end the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to the classrooms of America. Math and reading scores are up. We're closing an achievement gap for minority students across this country. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
My opponent has a different approach. He voted for the education reform but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposing a big-Government health care plan. You might remember in the debate, they said, "Talk about your health care plan." He looked straight in the camera, and he said, "The Government doesn't have anything to do with it." I could barely contain myself. [Laughter] The Government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people on his plan end up on a Government plan. He's voted against medical liability reform 10 times. He's put a personal-injury trial lawyer on the ticket.
The second clear choice involves the quality of life for your families. I ran for President to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. And I have kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms. Math and reading scores are now on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap by helping minority children. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
My opponent takes a different approach. He voted for the education reforms but now wants to weaken the accountability standards.
The President. The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I ran for President to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our public schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms, good, solid education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms. Math and reading scores are now up in America. We're closing an achievement gap by helping our minority children. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms, extend them to our high schools so no child is left behind in America.
My opponent has a different approach. He voted for education reform, and now he wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposing a big-Government health care plan. I remember that debate when he looked square in the camera when they asked him about his health care plan. He said, "The Government didn't have anything to do with it." I could barely contain myself. [Laughter] The Government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people would end up on a Government program. The wrong prescription for American families is to federalize your health care.
The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I believe every child can learn and every school must teach. I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations and reform our public schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms that bring high standards to the classrooms. Math and reading scores are now on the rise. We are closing the achievement gap by helping minority children. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so no child is left behind in America.
My opponent has a different approach. He voted for education reform but now wants to weaken the accountability standards. He's proposing a big-Government health care plan. You might remember one of the debates, when they asked him about his health care plan, he looked in the camera and said, "The Government doesn't have anything to do with it." I could barely contain myself. [Laughter] The Government has got a lot to do with it. Eighty percent of the people end up on a Government health care plan under his vision. And that is the wrong prescription for American families.
The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I believe every child can learn and that every school must teach. I went to Washington to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations and to reform our public schools. I have kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to the classrooms. Math and reading scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap by helping minority students all across America. In a new term, we will build on these reforms, extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
The second clear choice in this election involves the quality of life for our Nation's families. I believe every child can learn, and I expect every school to teach. When I ran for President, I promised to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations by reforming our schools. I kept my word. We passed education reforms to bring high standards to our classrooms. Math and reading scores are on the rise. We're closing the achievement gap by helping minority students. My vision for a new term is to build on these reforms and extend them to our high schools so that no child is left behind in America.
Southern Baptists are the soldiers in the armies of compassion at home and abroad. You're bringing hope to the continent of Africa, and I thank you for that. In Uganda, Southern Baptists have emphasized abstinence and helped as that country reduced the percentage of people infected with HIV by more than two-thirds in less than a decade and a half. In Sudan and other countries across Africa, the Samaritan's Purse ministry provides food and water and medical care and education to suffering people.
And finally, Africa needs better governance. All our aid will come to nothing if countries are ruled by corrupt dictators. When aid and trade are linked to good policies, more people are lifted out of poverty. We should generously reward countries that fight corruption, ensure political liberty and economic freedom, invest in health and education of their people, and promote women's rights. And we should not be afraid to stop aid to dictators like Zimbabwe's Mugabe. I urge the G-8 to make no compromise in the demand for good governance.
Over a million people die of malaria on the continent of Africa on an annual basis, most of whom are under 5 years old. This is a problem we can solve. I laid out an initiative the other day for $1.2 billion to help eradicate the scourges of malaria on the continent of Africa. This is an area where we can work together. And I agree strongly with what the Prime Minister said: We expect there to be good governance on the continent of Africa. I don't know how we can look our taxpayers in the eye and say, "This is a good deal, to give money to countries that are corrupt." What we're interested in, in our countries, is helping people, and therefore, we have said that we'll give aid, absolutely. We'll cancel debt—you bet—but we want to make sure that the governments invest in their people, invest in the health of their people, the education of their people, and fight corruption.
Thirdly, education is a vital part of bridging divides. As you know, I came to Washington intent upon challenging a system which, in my view, too often gave up on children; that said, "Let's don't measure, and let's just move them through." It's a system that let a lot of families down, but more importantly, let a lot of children down. I think education is one of the keys to addressing the issue of divides in our country. So the No Child Left Behind Act, which challenges what I've called the soft bigotry of low expectations, is beginning to make good results. You know why? Because we measure.
Finally, I want to spend a little time on education, briefly. First of all, No Child Left Behind Act is working. It's a piece of legislation that says, "We're going to raise the standards for every child, and we're going to measure to make sure children are meeting those standards." Can you imagine—you might remember the old— well, I'll tell you. When I was Governor of Texas, we had a system that didn't measure right early on. And guess what happened? We just shuffled kids through the system who couldn't read, and we found out too late. And that is a terrible system. It lets people down. And we're spending a lot of your money. It seems like to me, it makes sense to say, when we spend your money, we ought to insist upon results. Results are good for the taxpayers; more importantly, they're good for the students. So now we measure early, before it's too late, and we're correcting problems, before they're too late. And our kids are learning to read.
Today we're heartened by the news that the number of abortions is declining. But the most recent data reports that more than one in five pregnancies end in an abortion. America is better than this, so we will continue to work for a culture of life where a woman with an unplanned pregnancy knows there are caring people who will support her, where a pregnant teen can carry her child and complete her education, where the dignity of both the mother and child is honored and cherished.
On education, one side said—one side says we should spend your tax dollars without measuring whether or not our children are actually learning to read and write and add and subtract. You and I believe in accountability. We believe parents should have more options, and we believe in liberating children from failing public schools.
Together, we've worked to strengthen America's lifelines of learning, including our Nation's Catholic schools. The Catholic Church has a proud educational tradition dating back centuries, and one of the Holy Father's priorities has been maintaining this tradition in the United States. Today, America's Catholic schools serve thousands of students, both Catholic and non-Catholic, in some of our Nation's poorest neighborhoods. They help minority students narrow the achievement gap. They prepare children for lives of character and purpose and success. And yet these schools are closing at an alarming rate. Nearly 1,200 Catholic schools have shut their doors since the year 2000.
In my State of the Union Address, I proposed a new $300 million program called Pell Grants for Kids. And the reason I did so is cause I want to help low-income children in underperforming public schools be able to attend a private or parochial school of their choice. I am concerned about the loss of a major national asset, and that is the decline of Catholic schools, particularly in inner-city America. And to this end, next week we're having a White House Summit on Inner-City Children and Faith-Based Schools. And the purpose of the summit is to highlight the lack of educational options facing low-income urban students. And we're going to bring together educators and clergy and philanthropists and business leaders, all aiming to urge there to be reasonable legislation out of Congress and practical solutions to save these schools and, more importantly, to save the children.
President Fox and I will get started at his ranch tomorrow. I'm looking forward to hearing his ideas on expanding trade throughout the hemisphere, on safe and orderly migration, on expanding educational opportunity for all our children, and what we can do together to fight drug trafficking and other types of organized crime.
We talked about strengthening our trade relationship, which offers hope and opportunity on both sides of our border. We talked about how our two nations can work together to meet our current and future energy needs. We exchanged ideas about safe and orderly migration, a policy that respects individuals on both sides of the border. We talked about expanding educational opportunities. We talked about what we can do together to fight drug trafficking and other types of organized crime.
We've just lived through a decade of the most exciting, important things done by government have been done by Governors. In 7 years, you've reduced welfare rolls by more than half, improved millions of the lives of your fellow citizens by helping them find work. You brought new meaning to crime prevention programs. You pioneered education reforms, and many of you have shown how tax relief can reenergize State economies.
The agenda is long and very important. Equal opportunity is an empty hope without good schools. So the education reform legislation passed by both the House and the Senate spreads power to local communities and, for the first time, demands results in return. It's time to act when we find that children who graduate from high school have only an eighth grade education. He's been betrayed by the adult world, and we must end that betrayal by having high expectations, strong accountability systems, and the resources necessary to make sure that not one child gets left behind in America.
But we must have goals beyond just punishment. We must, at the deepest level, embrace our youth instead of fearing them. It starts with making sure we've got good education systems all around America. An educated child is one much less likely to commit a crime.
We understand that our two nations must work together in a spirit of respect and common purpose to seize opportunities and tackle challenges on the issues that affect the lives of our citizens, including migration, the environment, drugs, crime, corruption, and education. And both our Governments share a great project, a fully democratic Western Hemisphere that grows in prosperity and trades in freedom.
We both are dedicated to educating— to making sure our children are educated. President Fox shares the same passion I do about good schools and good quality education. He knows what I know, that an educated child is one much more likely to be able to realize the dreams of our respective countries. That's why I'm hopeful Congress will quit talking about an education bill, get one out of conference committee, so I can sign a good reform package to make sure public education fulfills the promise of our schools.
All of our citizens need basic education. The greatest resource of any nation is the creative energies of its people. They must gain the skills demanded by a new economic world. Only when literacy and learning are widespread will the benefits of the global economy be widely shared.
Our times present many challenges. Yet I'm confident about our shared future. I know that our region and our world can trade in freedom. I know we can bring health and education and prosperity to our people. And I know we can defeat terror so our children and grandchildren can live in peace and security.
The President. Well, first of all, there's a lot of money spent from the Federal level to help—to help with reeducation. And one of the programs that I just mentioned is the use of Federal monies to empower State Governments to provide opportunities for reeducation.
To answer your question, it's about to happen when the Congress passes the education reform bill and the education bill, the funding mechanism necessary for education. But education is a priority not only here, but as my good wife reminded everybody on the radio, it's got to be a priority around the world. There is no excuse for the Taliban Government to have treated women and young girls the way they have and not educated people.
Education is a domestic priority. No question about it, it's a domestic priority. And we're increasing education spending at the Federal Government to help local districts. But we also have got to remind people around the world, if we want peace in the world, other nations must do a better job of treating people with respect by making sure that they are educated, as well.
Speaking about education, you go to school, don't you? Let's hear your question.
Secondly—it goes to this lady's point right here—is to make sure that every child in America is well educated, starting with every child learning to read. There's nothing like an education to provide hope for people. Part of the reason why people are discouraged is because they lose hope. They say, "Well, this society isn't meant for me." A hopeful society is an educated society. And so we've got to make sure we get it right, we have an education— a focus on education, understanding that education is the gateway to such great freedom and opportunity.
It's a national imperative that we win. And I understand that you all are amongst the most important allies we have to achieve this goal. You've got a track record of success. You sponsor drug education programs and youth summits and parent training courses. You support drug intervention programs and foster great counseling services. You're helping to build a culture of responsibility, one that respects the law, one that teaches our children right from wrong, and one that strengthens our commitments to our fellow citizens.
And also on this stage is the fine United States Senator from the State of Iowa, Chuck Grassley. He's worked with the people of Iowa to begin what they call the Face It Together Coalition, the first ever statewide antidrug coalition led by a United States Senator. The coalition has a comprehensive workplace drug education program. It works with coalitions around the State for best practices for communitybased antidrug efforts. It conducts workshops to train faith-based leaders on effective drug prevention strategies.
It instructs Director Walters to focus the greatest resources on areas of the greatest needs, by giving priority to coalitions that serve economically disadvantaged neighborhoods. The reauthorization bill creates a new class of grants that will help established coalitions assist new ones, assist new folks on how to battle this scourge called drug use. And the bill creates a National Community Antidrug Coalition Institute to provide education and training and technical assistance to coalitions all throughout our country.
On the domestic front, I'm really pleased with what's happened in the Congress to get the education bill, a significant piece of education reform that believes that the Nation should have high standards for every single child and that we ought to make sure that when we spend money that there's results. And along those lines, we also in this bill trust the local governments to make many decisions about educating children.
People say to me, "What can I do, Mr. President, to help?" And my answer is, if you want to fight evil, do something good in your neighborhood. If you want to fight evil, be a part of the goodness of the country by loving a child who may have lost a parent, by walking across the street to a shut-in and say, "Somebody cares about you." If you want to be a part of the war against terror, go to your church or synagogue and mosque and ask the question, "How can we love a neighbor in need," and then feed somebody. If you want to be a part of the war on terror, help a teacher; get involved with your public education; mentor a child.
I want to thank other locally elected officials for being here, and I particularly want to thank a member of my Cabinet. This man is a man who understands public education. He understands it well. You see, I picked him out of the trenches. I didn't find somebody, somebody who can talk theory to be the Department of Education— head of the Department of Education. I found somebody who has practiced. And when I asked him to join my team, he was the superintendent of the Houston Independent School District, a school district that was committed to make sure there was excellence for every child, and no child—I mean no child—would be left behind. Please welcome the Secretary of Education, Rod Paige.
We are on our way, after this chance for me to tell you about how I think things are going, to Booker T. Washington High School to talk about the need for folks to teach. I'm going to spend a little time at the end of this talk, talking about that. But Rod is here to highlight our passion and focus on education.
We also know that early drug education defeats demand, and so in my budget there are $644 million on the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program. That is a significant commitment. We also want to make sure that it is effective, that the message that gets into the schools is one that sends this clear message: Don't use drugs, no ands, ifs, or buts. Don't use them. And we know the media can have a powerful effect. And so we've got a $180 million on the National Youth Anti-Drug Media Campaign, a series of messages which lay out the hazards of drug use. And so ours is a concerted effort to reduce demand. It's central to making sure we've got an effective strategy.
My country certainly has its share of problems, no question about that. And we have our faults. Like most nations, we're on a long journey toward achieving our own ideals of equality and justice. Yet there's a reason our Nation shines as a beacon of hope and opportunity, a reason many throughout the world dream of coming to America. It's because we're a free nation, where men and women have the opportunity to achieve their dreams. No matter your background or your circumstance of birth, in America you can get a good education; you can start your own business; you can raise a family; you can worship freely and help elect the leaders of your community and your country. You can support the policies of our Government, or you're free to openly disagree with them. Those who fear freedom sometimes argue it could lead to chaos, but it does not, because freedom means more than every man for himself.
But always we talk about two key issues, to address your problem. One is welfare: How do we structure a welfare system that helps people in need and, in my judgment, should not make them dependent upon their Government? And the other big issue is education. It's always not only an important part of campaigns, but it's an important part of being—once you're in office.
When I was the Governor of Texas, I used to always say, "An educated child is one less likely to commit a crime." As a Governor, and now as President, I have spent a lot of time working with members of both political parties to develop an education plan that starts making sure children learn before they just get shuffled through the system.
So as part of an education bill I managed to get through Congress last year, we've got a significant reading initiative, where we'll work with the States and the local jurisdictions to focus on an education program that emphasizes reading. This year I hope to work with my wife and others on a early childhood development program, so the youngsters get the building blocks to learn how to read.
I'm actually working my way to your question, I promise you—[laughter]—because education is the best anticrime program. It's important to enforce law. It's important to hold people accountable for their actions. It is important to have consistent policy that says, "If you harm somebody, there will be a punishment for that harm." But in the best interests for my country, the long-term solution is to make sure the education system works for everybody. And when that happens, there will be a more hopeful future for people, and there will be less poverty, less hopelessness, and less crime.
Welfare recipients must spend at least 40 hours a week in work and preparing for work. Because many adults on welfare need new skills, my plan will allow States to combine work with up to 2 days each week of education or job training. So in other words, it's a combination of working and training. And for people who need intensive short-term help, our proposal offers 3 months of full-time drug rehabilitation or 3 months of full-time job training. And adolescents' mothers—adolescent mothers can meet their work requirements by attending high school.
So my administration will give unprecedented support to strengthening marriages. Many good programs help couples who want to get married and stay married. Isn't that right? We just talked about one such program. Premarital education programs can increase happiness in marriage and reduce divorce by teaching couples how to resolve conflict, how to improve communication, and most importantly, how to treat each other with respect. There are also programs for couples with serious problems, alcoholism, infidelity, or gambling. Trained mentor couples who have had experience— who have experienced severe marital problems themselves now teach other couples how to repair their own marriages. Using this approach, one national program reports being able to save up to 70 percent of very troubled marriages.
I'm also proposing $135 million for abstinence education programs. Abstinence is the surest way and the only completely effective way to prevent unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted diseases. When our children face a choice between self-restraint and self-destruction, Government should not be neutral. Government should not sell children short by assuming they are incapable of acting responsibly. We must promote the good choices.
We had a chance to talk about education today in the car. I was promoting an early childhood reading initiative here in the Philadelphia area. Mike knows what I know, that we must set high standards for every child, that we must expect the best from every single child, and that we must hold people accountable for results. It's fine for States and the Federal Government to spend money, but for that money we expect our children to learn how to read and write and add and subtract. And if the status quo is unacceptable, if children are not learning to read and write and add and subtract, it's important to have somebody in the Governor's office who is willing to say, "That is not good enough. The fact that children can't read and write and add and subtract is not satisfactory to me, because every child counts in America, and no child should be left behind."
It is important to have a Governor who sets high standards and expects the best and a Governor who is willing to challenge a system that simply shuffles children through. During the campaign, I called that the soft bigotry of low expectations. Mike understands that we must hold people accountable, that we must insist upon basic education. We must challenge failure wherever we find it, in order for the American Dream to reach every neighborhood in every community in every State of our Nation. And I want to thank Mike for that.
I had the honor of working on and signing a substantial piece of education legislation, a significant reform. I was able to work with Senator Kennedy and Senator Gregg and Congressmen Boehner and Miller to get this done. The Federal Government spends a lot of money on education, and finally we're beginning to say, "What are the results? Can our children actually do what we expect them to do?"
In that bill not only do we insist upon strong accountability to show us whether or not we're achieving standards, but we pass a lot of power back to the States, where power belongs. I fully recognize one size does not fit all when it comes to public education all across America. It's important for Governors to be empowered to meet high standards. And therefore, it's important to have good Governors, who understand high standards and accountability, in the Governors' offices all across America. Mike Fisher will be such a Governor.
I gave a speech the other day on the importance of making sure that children learn how to read early in life, so that when they start kindergarten, there's not this huge learning gap that takes place in America. Johnny figured that out way before my speech. He figured out preschool education was important before a lot of other people knew it was important. And I appreciate Johnny's efforts on focusing the State of Connecticut and his budget on preschool programs as well as spending billions of dollars to make sure class sizes are smaller in the State of Connecticut.
Listen, we passed historic education reform in Washington, DC. And thanks to the Members on the stage and both Republicans and Democrats working together, finally, in Washington, we were able to pass a meaningful piece of legislation, part of which is to not only hold people to high standards and to expect the best out of every child, but part of it is we're going to trust the Governors and local people to figure out the path to excellence. And it gives me great confidence in supporting such a bill, knowing that Johnny Rowland is the Governor of the State of Connecticut.
I have mentioned a couple of the issues that we've worked on, education and tax relief. But there's a lot to do in Washington. We need an energy policy, an energy policy on the one hand that enhances conservation, that unleashes the technology of the country to enable our cars to run cleaner, our plants to burn cleaner. But we need to explore more, too. We need to be less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. This was made pretty clear the other day when Saddam Hussein stands up and announces he's going to try to organize an oil boycott. You know my opinion about Saddam. [Laughter] The world's not going to follow him. But it just goes to show how important it is to diversify our supply away from places like Iraq.
I want to thank mi esposa, Laura, for her—[laughter]—mi amor. I want to thank Sara for her passion for the education of Latino children. She is a—well, she's unique. She's smart; she's capable. After all, she's a tejana. [Laughter] But I really do appreciate her focus, her willingness to work hard to make sure that every child has got the opportunity to realize his or her dreams in America.
The thing I like about Norm is, he focuses on results. As the mayor of St. Paul— I'm told, a pretty Democratic city; at least that's what the numbers looked like to me the last time I ran—[laughter]—he wins as a Republican because he brought a compassionate conservative agenda to the people. He focused on things that matter, like jobs and making sure children got a quality education.
I want to thank J. Reeves, who is the principal of the Madison Central High School, for having us. I want to thank the Madison High band. Listen, you all were great when you serenaded us coming in. [Laughter] I tried to pop out of the limousine—[laughter]—to say thanks, but it was moving a little too fast. [Laughter] But I do want to thank you all. The principal was telling me you're an award-winning band, and I so much appreciate the fact that you played. Unfortunately, most band members are in the overflow room, so if you're listening, thanks. I also want to thank Mike Kent, who is the Madison County superintendent of education.
Every homebuyer has responsibilities and rights that need to be understood clearly. And yet when you look at some of the contracts, there's a lot of small print. And you can imagine somebody newly arrived from Peru looking at all that print and saying, "I'm not sure I can possibly understand that. Why do I want to buy a home?" There's an educational process that needs to go on, not only to explain the contract, explain obligation, but also to explain financing options, to help people understand the complexities of a homeownership market, and also at the same time to protect people from unscrupulous lenders, people who would take advantage of a good-hearted soul who is trying to realize their dream.
Homeownership education is critical. And so today I'm pleased to announce that through Mel's office, we're going to distribute $35 million in 2003 to more than 100 national, State, and local organizations that promote homeownership through buyer education.
And so is Luis Cortes, who represents Nueva Esperanza in Philadelphia. I went to see Luis one time in the inner-city Philadelphia. Luis is—at least he was; he's probably still there—in what one would call a tough neighborhood. There's a lot of abandoned buildings, and I mean beautiful old structures just empty. Luis had a dream to revitalize his neighborhood, starting with a good charter school, one that would work, one that would teach kids how to read and write and add and subtract. But he also understood that a homeownership program is incredibly important to revitalize this neighborhood that a lot of folks had already quit on. I suspect one day we'll all go back to Luis' neighborhood, and we'll find first-time homeowners there and a good education system. And this will be the beginning of a neighborhood revitalization in that part of Philadelphia, because there was vision and drive and hope for our fellow citizens.
The Internet is a remarkable technology. We've all learned that. It's revolutionized education, vastly increased the flow of information, increases our knowledge. We're now in closer touch with our family and friends. People are now connected across the globe. It's an exciting tool. But more than half of our Nation children now on-line—let me start over—more than half of the Nation is now online, and 75 percent of the children are online.
Wealthy nations have the responsibility to help the developing world and to make certain our help is effective. Through the Millennium Challenge Account, I have proposed a 50-percent increase in America's core development assistance. This aid will go to where it will do the most good, not to corrupt elites but to nations that are ruled justly, nations that invest in the health and education of their people, and nations that encourage economic freedom. If European Governments will adopt the same standards, we can work side by side in providing the kind of development aid that helps transform entire societies.
The Presidential Medal of Freedom is America's highest civil award. It is conferred upon men and women of high achievement in the arts and entertainment, public service, science, education, athletics, business, and other fields. For most recipients, this award is a special distinction added to many prior honors.
Two years ago, in this city, world leaders agreed on a vision to expand opportunity and spread prosperity throughout the hemisphere. With this year's Special Summit, we continue to put that vision into action. Through the Inter-American Development Bank, we are expanding access to credit for small-business entrepreneurs, the key engines of growth and job creation for any nation's economy. We're helping nations improve their legal systems to protect property rights so that owners can use their property as collateral to finance the purchase of a home or to start a business. We're investing in the health and education of our peoples, and we're intensifying our common fight against corruption.
The President is absolutely right. The best way to eradicate poverty is to encourage trade between nations. Trade gives people hope and provides opportunity. Obviously, that must be coupled with anticorruption measures, like the President has done here in Mexico. It must be coupled with good education measures. At this meeting, we're going to talk about ways to get capital into the hands of the entrepreneurial classes of respective countries. But without trade, there's going to be— it's going to be hard for some people to find opportunity.
We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We can go forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us. We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare, or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.
One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their lives and futures on drugs. Our Government is helping parents confront this problem with aggressive education, treatment, and law enforcement. Drug use in high school has declined by 11 percent over the last 2 years. Four hundred thousand fewer young people are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001. In my budget, I propose new funding to continue our aggressive, community-based strategy to reduce demand for illegal drugs. Drug testing in our schools has proven to be an effective part of this effort. So tonight I propose an additional 23 million for schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save children's lives. The aim here is not to punish children but to send them this message: We love you, and we do not want to lose you.
All skills start with education. My administration has put education at the top of the agenda. We passed the No Child Left Behind Act, a good law that is bringing higher standards and accountability to every public school in America. We have a plan to help high school students who fall behind in reading and math. We have a plan to help community colleges train workers for the industries that are creating the most new jobs. We are strongly committed to education because we believe everyone in America should have a chance to learn and to succeed and to realize the great promise of our country.
And we stand for a culture of responsibility in America. We're changing the culture of America from one that has said, "If it feels good, do it," and, "If you've got a problem, blame somebody else," to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make. If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart. If you're concerned about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
This economy of ours is going through a time of challenge and change, and we're helping people to gain the skills and security to make a good living and to look forward to a good retirement. All skills start with education. That's why I was so insistent that Congress pass the No Child Left Behind Act. It is a good law, a sound piece of legislation, historic reform that brings high standards and accountability to every classroom in America.
We stand for a culture of responsibility in America. We're changing the culture in this country from one that has said, "If it feels good, do it," and, "If you've got a problem, blame somebody else," to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart. If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
We stand for a culture of responsibility in America. We're changing the culture of our country from one that has said, "If it feels good, do it," and, "If you've got a problem, blame somebody else," to a culture in which each of us understands we are responsible for the decisions we make in life. If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart. If you're worried about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in the responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
I see some people who, unfortunately, have to follow me around the country. I've been spending a lot of time recently on job training programs, because education is one really important way as to how we're going to have lasting prosperity. I think if you talk to people on the leading edge of change here in the country, they will tell you that one of their biggest concerns is to be able to find workers that are skilled in the jobs of the 21st century. Obviously, we've got to get it right through the No Child Left Behind Act, which I'll be glad to expound on, if it's one of your questions.
I want the Iraqi people to hear me on this. I'm told that some in Iraq are very worried that America will lose its will and not help this important country full of good people become a free country. The Iraqi people must understand that I will not lose my will, that we will help Iraq become free and peaceful, that we will stand with those who want a new Iraq after Saddam Hussein to develop, where mothers and dads can raise their children in a peaceful world, where business and shopkeepers can grow their businesses, where the education system works well, where people can get good health. And I believe it's possible.
If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you are responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves.
We are headed in the right direction, but we still have work to do, so my administration is acting to encourage teens to make healthy choices. Although teen drug use has decreased, we can and must do more. We know that random drug testing in schools is effective, and it allows us to identify kids who need help. In my most recent budget, I proposed spending an additional $23 million for school drug testing. And although teen birth rates have declined, about 3 million of our teenagers contract sexually transmitted diseases each year. So we've requested a doubling of Federal funding for abstinence-only education programs. We have also requested $25 million for our Character Education Initiative. This program will encourage schools to develop curricula that promote good character and help children develop a sense of responsibility to their community. Today I urge the Congress to act on all these important initiatives.
When I first came to the Urban League, I vowed to change that attitude in Washington. It was one of the things I said. I said, "Give me a chance to work the education system." And we have. We passed good law. Listen, the Government has got a funding responsibility. We have. We've increased Federal funding for K through 12 by 49 percent from 2001. I label that significant.
And it's paying off. The test scores, the accountability systems are beginning to show that African American fourth graders are catching up. There is an education gap in America, and so long as there is an education gap, we must be relentless in our pursuit for excellence.
And so we've got to make sure we continue to work not only in the early grades but in the later grades in public education so that people can say, "I've got something that means something." It's a certification for the ability to read, write, add, and subtract, to understand the sciences and maths as well. That's possible, see. You've got to think it's possible in the first place; otherwise, you wouldn't insist upon it.
Plus, I want to make sure the community college system is vibrant. I put money aside and will continue to do so for the community colleges. They're available, affordable. They're accessible. They're good things. They can change their curriculum to meet the needs of a local community. They actually train people for jobs which exist. They're good opportunities for kids coming out of high school. Look, education is the future of the country. And that's why, under my administration, we've increased the number of men and women who will be receiving Pell grants to nearly one million, and why, under my budget, funding for historically black colleges is at an alltime high. It's what I said I would do when I was running for President, see. I told people I'd do that, and I've done it. And the country is better off for it, because education is the cornerstone of a hopeful tomorrow.
I was proud to support Mayor Tony Williams. He's my Mayor right now. I've got one mayor in Crawford and one mayor in Washington. [Laughter] Tony is the Mayor of Washington. He's a very good Mayor, by the way. He's a good man. Maybe you know him. But he and I—I work with Tony. And I signed a bill into law creating taxpayer-sponsored scholarships for students in Washington, DC. And let me tell you why. I believe this: If school choice is good for the wealthy, it's good enough for disadvantaged children in America. This is a good piece of legislation. It's a good piece of legislation which is going to help improve education for all children in the Nation's Capital.
But there's more than just fighting crime. We need to help the 600,000 men and women who are being released from prison each year. I went to the Congress in my State of the Union; I talked about a prison reentry program. I said, "Put some money up to help these souls come out. Let's make sure we're the country of the second chance. Let's make sure people have got a chance to get an education and a job. Let's make sure there's—if need be, let's make sure there's church families available to welcome a person back in community." And so this prison reentry program is a vital part of making sure America is a safe country.
We've done a lot in 3 1/2 years. I ask you to look at the record of accomplishment. And I didn't do this alone. I've got a good administration, really good people. It's a diverse Cabinet. It's a Cabinet full of strong people. It's a Cabinet who are serving our country first, people like Rod Paige. You've heard my talk about education. I hope you have a sense of my passion to make sure we get it right. I understand the importance of schools in America. I picked a good man to serve as the head of the Education Department, Rod Paige. He was—[applause].
Does blocking the Faith-Based Initiative help neighborhoods where the only social service provider could be a church? Does the status quo in education really, really help the children of this country? Does class warfare—has class warfare or higher taxes ever created decent jobs in the inner city? Are you satisfied with the same answers on crime, excuses for drugs, and blindness to the problem of the family?
There's more to do; this world of ours is changing. The jobs of the future will require greater knowledge and a higher level of skill, and so we must reform our high schools to make sure a high school diploma means something. We will expand math and education so our youngsters can compete in a high-tech world. We will expand the use of the Internet to bring high-level training to classrooms all across America with 4 years—with 4 more years. We will help raise a generation of young Americans to have confidence and the skills necessary to realize the American promise.
It's not enough to advocate reform; you have to get it done, see, because when it comes to reforming schools to provide an excellent education for all our children, results matter. When it comes to health care reforms to give families more access and more choices, results matter. When it comes to improving our economy and creating quality jobs, results matter. When it comes to defending America and spreading freedom and peace, results matter. When it comes to electing a President, results matter.
The President. This week, the other party gathered in Boston. And they had a convention and there was a lot of clever speeches and some pretty big promises. Listen, I think my opponent has good intentions, but good intentions don't always translate into results. He's been there for 19 years in the U.S. Senate. He's had thousands of votes but few signature achievements. During 8 years on the Senate Intelligence Committee, for example, he voted to cut the intelligence budget, yet he had no record of reforming America's intelligence gathering capability. He's had no significant record on education or health care.
We stand for a culture of responsibility in America. This culture of this country is changing from one that has said, "If it feels good, just go ahead and do it," and "If you've got a problem, blame somebody else," to a culture in which each of us understands we're responsible for the decisions we make in life. If you're fortunate enough to be a mother or a father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart and all your soul. If you're worried about the quality of the education in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in a responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourselves.
Now, I'm going to reverse that. I'm going to change that. We're going to restore the fiscal discipline we had in the 1990s. Every plan that I have laid out, my health care plan, my plan for education, my plan for kids to be able to get better college loans, I've shown exactly how I'm going to pay for those. And we start—we don't do it exclusively, but we start by rolling back George Bush's unaffordable tax cut for the wealthiest people, people earning more than $200,000 a year, and we pass, hopefully, the McCain/Kerry commission, which identified some $60 billion that we can get. We shut the loophole which has American workers actually subsidizing the loss of their own job. They just passed an expansion of that loophole in the last few days, $43 billion of giveaways, including favors to the oil and gas industry and to people importing ceiling fans from China.
I'm going to stand up and fight for the American worker, and I'm going to do it in a way that's fiscally sound. I show how I pay for the health care, how we pay for the education. I have a manufacturing jobs credit. We pay for it by shutting that loophole overseas. We raise the student loans. I pay for it by changing the relationship with the banks. This President has never once vetoed one bill, the first President in 100 years not to do that.
President Bush. I say, Bob, "I've got policies to continue to grow our economy and create the jobs of the 21st century, and here's some help for you to go get an education. Here's some help for you to go to a community college. We've expanded trade adjustment assistance. We want to help pay for you to gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century."
You know, there's a lot of talk about how to keep the economy growing, and we talk about fiscal matters. But perhaps the best way to keep jobs here in America and to keep this economy growing is to make sure our education system works.
I went to Washington to solve problems. And I saw a problem in the public education system in America. They were just shuffling too many kids through the system, year after year, grade after grade, without learning the basics. And so we said, "Let's raise the standards. We're spending more money, but let's raise the standards and measure early and solve problems now, before it's too late."
You know, education is how to help the person who has lost a job. Education is how to make sure this—we've got a workforce that's productive and competitive. You got—4 more years, I've got more to do to continue to raise standards, to continue to reward teachers and school districts that are working, to emphasize math and science in the classrooms, to continue to expand Pell grants, to make sure that people have an opportunity to start their career with a college diploma.
Senator Kerry. I want you to notice how the President switched away from jobs and started talking about education principally. Let me come back in one moment to that, but I want to speak for a second, if I can, to what the President said about fiscal responsibility. Being lectured by the President on fiscal responsibility is a little bit like Tony Soprano talking to me about law and order in this country. [Laughter]
But let me talk about what's really important for the worker you're referring to, and that's to make sure the education system works, is to make sure we raise standards. Listen, the No Child Left Behind Act is really a jobs act when you think about it. The No Child Left Behind Act says, "We'll raise standards. We'll increase Federal spending, but in return for extra spending, we now want people to measure—States and local jurisdictions to measure, to show us whether or not a child can read or write or add and subtract." You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem, and we weren't diagnosing problems. And therefore, just kids were being shuffled through the school. And guess who would get shuffled through? Children whose parents wouldn't speak English as first language, just moved through; many inner-city kids, just moved through. We've stopped that practice now by measuring early, and when we find a problem, we spend extra money to correct it.
I remember a lady in Houston, Texas, telling me reading is the new civil right. And she's right. In order to make sure people have jobs for the 21st century, we've got to get it right in the education system. And we're beginning to close a minority achievement gap now. You see, we'd never be able to compete in the 21st century unless we have an education system that doesn't quit on children, an education system that raises standards, an education that makes sure there's excellence in every classroom.
Now, right here in Arizona, that difference would have been $131 million to the State of Arizona to help its kids be able to have better education and to lift the property tax burden from its citizens. The President reneged on his promise to fund No Child Left Behind. He will tell you he's raised the money, and he has, but he didn't put in what he promised. And that makes a difference in the lives of our children.
And secondly, only a liberal Senator from Massachusetts would say that a 49-percent increase in funding for education was not enough. We've increased funds, but more importantly, we've reformed the system to make sure that we solve problems early, before they're too late. He talked about the unemployed. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. He talked about children whose parents don't speak English as a first language. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. And that's what the No Child Left Behind Act does.
And secondly, like my opponent, I don't agree we ought to have quotas—I agree, we shouldn't have quotas. But we ought to have an aggressive effort to make sure people are educated, to make sure when they get out of high school there's Pell grants available for them, which is what we've done. We've expanded Pell grants by a million students. Do you realize, today in America, we spend $73 billion to help 10 million low- and middle-income families better afford college? That's the access I believe is necessary, is to make sure every child learns to read, write, add, and subtract early, to be able to build on that education by going to college so they can start their careers with a college diploma.
We are now 15 days away from a critical election. Many important domestic issues are at stake. I have a positive, hopeful agenda for job creation, broader health coverage, and better public education. Yet all the progress we hope to make depends on the security of our Nation. America is in the middle of a global war on terror, a struggle unlike any we have ever known before. We face an enemy that is determined to kill the innocent and make our country into a battlefield. In the war on terror, there is no place for confusion and no substitute for victory. For the sake of our future and our freedom, we will fight this war with every asset of our national power, and we will prevail.
To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must prepare a rising generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under the No Child Left Behind Act, standards are higher, test scores are on the rise, and we're closing the achievement gap for minority students. Now we must demand better results from our high schools, so every high school diploma is a ticket to success. We will help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career by reforming our job training system and strengthening America's community colleges. And we'll make it easier for Americans to afford a college education by increasing the size of Pell grants.
The President. Let me—first of all, I want to thank my Governor friends for coming. From all around the country, people came—from Idaho, from the South. The head of the National Governors is here, and of course, the soon-to-be-head of the National Governors. I'm honored you all came. It's good to see you in a new setting—for me, at least. And we had a long discussion about education.
These Governors made education their number one priority in their State, and obviously they're keenly aware of the role of Federal Government. And we've had a really good discussion about how to make their jobs easier. And their job is to make sure every child gets educated, which is the noblest of all calling in America.
So I appreciate your coming. It's always good to be talking to people who know what they're talking about. And when it comes to public education, Governors really understand the subject. So I'm grateful you're here.
One of the reasons I came is, I think it's important for the Capital to stay focused on public education and public education reforms. One of the key ingredients in our package we sent up to the Congress is a reading initiative. I'm so impressed about what Ms. Dobbins is doing at this school, what the superintendent is insisting upon—accountability-based reading system.
And she told me that they've got a collaborative effort here with the National Institute of Health, which has developed curriculum based upon the science of reading. And it's impressive that the school and the District are willing to set high standards and ask the fundamental question, what works in education; are willing to implement curriculum that works; and then are willing to be held accountable for implementing the curriculum.
The President. We're not going to give a specific number today, but we are going to argue, make the case that we can slow the rate of spending down; that our spending will be based upon priorities, the priorities I campaigned on; that we will meet the objectives that I talked about in the campaign, which is protecting Social Security, funding public education, strengthening the military, paying down debt—and we'll be paying down debt; but that we believe the right number for the tax relief package is $1.6 trillion.
My budget will fund our priorities from education to defense to protecting Social Security and Medicare. It will pay down our national debt. And when we have done all that, we will still have some money left over. I strongly believe we should return that money, the leftover money, to you, the American people, in the form of tax relief. It is, after all, your money.
In addition to debt reduction and tax relief, we have some other important priorities, including a bold proposal to reform American education. Money isn't the whole answer. High standards and accountability matter most. But if we're serious about reforms, like early reading and teacher training, testing on reading and math in every school, the Federal budget must reflect these commitments.
Not long ago, agreement on debt reduction, tax relief, and education reform seemed impossible. But today, people in both parties are impatient with the status quo—with high debt, high tax bills, high energy bills, and falling education standards. This is our chance to act, and we cannot let it pass.
Today I was in St. Louis talking about education. There is no more important subject as far as I'm concerned, to make sure every child gets educated. I know the Yahngs feel the same way. But I also want to talk about the budget, the budget of the United States Government, and the budget of the people of the United States.
I'm going to submit a budget next week to the United States Congress. It is a budget that will set priorities, just like each family does in America—set priorities. My priorities will make sure that we preserve and protect and strengthen Social Security, so that there's a Social Security system available for the Yahngs and their children, and for you, as well. A priority in my budget will be to make sure that the health care system in America is strong for the elderly, for the uninsured, and for all of us concerned about health. A priority will be public education.
I have a reasonable and balanced budget. It meets growing needs with a responsible rate of increase in spending. It funds priorities. And my administration has no higher priority than education.
The President. David, I—as far as this White House is concerned, it's time to go forward. I've too much to do to get a budget passed, to get reforms passed for education, to get a tax cut passed, to strengthen the military, than to be worrying about decisions that my predecessor made.
There's a lot of discussion about education reform on the Hill, and I'm confident that the focus will be the right focus. And my speech Tuesday night, I hope, will help keep the focus on the agenda.
And I should say also that I don't think if you look at the problems that are on the President's agenda, even his domestic agenda now in terms of the economy, in terms of some of the things—we actually had a brief conversation about education policy when we were on our walk together—I think there are some interesting things happening that—there's a good dialog on some of these things, too. So I'm sorry to disappoint you.
The Federal budget is a document about the size of a big city phone book and about as hard to read from cover to cover. The blueprint I submit this week contains many numbers, but there is one that probably counts more than any other: $5.6 trillion. That is the surplus the Federal Government expects to collect over the next 10 years, money left over after we have met our obligations to Social Security, Medicare, health care, education, defense, and other priorities.
The plan I submit will fund our highest national priorities. Education gets the biggest percentage increase of any Department in our Federal Government. We won't just spend more money on schools and education; we will spend it responsibly. We'll give States more freedom to decide what works. And as we give more to our schools, we're going to expect more in return by requiring States and local jurisdictions to test every year. How else can we know whether schools are teaching and children are learning?
A budget's impact is counted in dollars but measured in lives. Excellent schools, quality health care, a secure retirement, a cleaner environment, a stronger defense: These are all important needs, and we fund them. The highest percentage increase in our budget should go to our children's education. Education is not my top priority— education is my top priority, and by supporting this budget, you'll make it yours, as well.
Reading is the foundation of all learning. So during the next 5 years, we triple spending, adding $5 billion to help every child in America learn to read. Values are important, so we've tripled funding for character education to teach our children not only reading and writing but right from wrong. We've increased funding to train and recruit teachers, because we know a good education starts with a good teacher.
Critics of testing contend it distracts from learning. They talk about teaching to the test. But let's put that logic to the test. If you test a child on basic math and reading skills and you're teaching to the test, you're teaching math and reading. And that's the whole idea. As standards rise, local schools will need more flexibility to meet them, so we must streamline the dozens of Federal education programs into five and let States spend money in those categories as they see fit.
Steven and Josefina tell me they pay almost $8,000 a year in Federal income taxes. My plan will save them more than $2,000. Let me tell you what Steven says: "Two thousand dollars a year means a lot to my family. If we had this money, it would help us reach our goal of paying off our personal debt in 2 years' time." After that, Steven and Josefina want to start saving for Lianna's college education.
I can't tell you how much I appreciate Senator Zell Miller standing up side by side with the President. Oh, I know he's a Democrat, and of course, I'm a Republican, but both of us put America first. And this budget is an American budget, because it sets priorities. It is a budget that sets important priorities, starting with the education of our children.
I'm counting on you, when you find a neighbor in need, to reach out a hand, and say, "What can I do, brother or sister, to help you?" I'm counting on you to run a Boy Scout troop and to teach our children right from wrong. Our Nation counts on people who have got good heart and good will to say, "What can I do to make my neighborhood a better place," instead of hoping that the Federal Government, in its infinite wisdom, waves a magic wand and there's educational excellence in every school in Georgia. We need the good citizens of these communities to get involved with public education, to make sure our teachers are supported, excellence is demanded, accountability is in place so no children are left behind. No, I'm counting on you.
One thing that our governments must do is set priorities. Without priorities, there is haphazard spending. The job of a President is to set clear priorities. A priority of mine is public education. It was a priority of mine as the Governor of the State of Texas. It is a priority of mine as the President. I understand, however, that even though it is a priority, that does not mean Washington, DC, should run public schools. And so I look forward to working with Members of the Congress to pass power out of Washington to provide flexibility so local jurisdictions can help design the strategies necessary to make sure that every child in America gets educated.
And so we'll have a wide-ranging discussion here about education. And it's an important discussion to have. But I want to put it in the context of an overall budget.
And so we've set priorities. And we'll argue about whether or not the priorities are the right priorities. Some of them are going to say up there, "Well, you know, he didn't put enough in for education," or "He didn't put enough in for the military, didn't put enough in for here or there." Those are sometimes—are the people who aren't responsible for viewing the budget in its entirety. And that's okay. Everybody's entitled to an opinion, and there's a lot of them in Washington.
So I appreciate so very much the opportunity to not only make the case for education reform. And this school gets it. And evidently you get it, too, Governor, because the idea of insisting upon accountability as the cornerstone for reform makes eminent sense. We'll argue about the remedies for failure, we'll argue about what the consequences for failure are, but the truth of the matter is, the whole reform system begins by measuring, by holding people accountable, by holding up success so that we know whether or not the reading curriculum that has been put in place here works. The principal assures me it does, and the reason she's able to say so with certainty is because you measure. And therefore, another school that may have trouble cheating—treating their children how to read will be able to say, "Well, let's see how they do it here." We can prove that it works.
Your program does exactly that. I credit you, and I applaud you for your interest in parents and strengthening the family, in character education. Our teachers oftentimes feel unsupported at that level, and your programs are going to help them get that support they need.
Mr. Benson. Well, that money that I save—my priority is education for my children. I was going to put that money toward education, but I could put it towards something else because I know here at Lakewood Elementary, Ms. Lowe and her staff are doing great things to make sure my son has a quality education. And with the spending that you are proposing for the school, I'm just excited to see what Ms. Lowe and her staff has in store for my son for a quality education.
And that's going to be an incredibly important component of the reform, that we say each child matters and therefore the accountability systems must reflect the performance of each child, not kind of groups, collections of children. And the systems will then begin to emerge to individualize education.
Today we went to a computer lab, where the reading programs were constantly adjusting based upon the skill level of the participant on the computer. It's the forerunner of the individualization of education, the likes of which a lot of us have not imagined here before. It begins with an accountability system that measures on a per-child basis, so when we get up to Washington, we cannot let the whole concept of accountability be undermined by not—by a system that does not measure on an individual child basis. And that's exactly what I'm going to insist happens.
And so I think one of the ways to try to get the number up toward the 40 percent that was promised by the Federal Government years ago, is to be—is to have a commonsense approach, Raymond, and to give flexibility—well, I appreciate that, Jim. The reading program will help. It will help make sure the children get a good start on their education early. And so will the Head Start program, and the Head Start initiative.
Education is a priority, and we need to focus on education. But I also remember where I came from. It's one thing to spend money at the Federal level; it's another thing to make sure we understand how to achieve educational excellence for every child. And that means trusting local folks to chart the path to excellence. The people who care more about the children in a respective community are the people who live in the community. And so while we'll focus some Federal resources, we need to trust the local people by passing power out of Washington, DC, to run their public schools in America, and at the same time, we've got to insist upon results.
We've made it clear that education is important. We made it clear that health care is important. We made it clear that retirement systems are important, and we grew the discretionary spending by 4 percent. Now, the reason there is some hollering up here is because last year they grew the discretionary budget by 8 percent. It's unbelievable how much money they spent on the way out of town. And we're saying, let's be realistic with the people's money.
So the priorities in the budget I submitted are these. One, educating our children is a priority. The biggest increase of any Department in my budget goes to the Department of Education. I want you to also understand, though, I remember where I came from. I came from a State—I was a Governor—I firmly trust local folks to run the schools. The people who care most about the children in the State of Maine are the citizens of Maine. And the Federal Government, while it increases spending, must trust the Governors and local authorities. One size does not fit all when it comes to educating children. So we increased spending. But I look forward to working with the Senators and the Congressmen of the—pass power out of Washington, to provide a maximum flexibility so that the Governors and school board folks can take money and meet and match them to the needs that exist. So step one is an accountability—step one of a education reform program is local control of schools. It is a redline for me when it comes to Federal legislation.
Education is a priority in my budget. Our education budget—the Department of Education received the largest increase of any Department in our budget request to the Congress. It's one thing to ask for more money, but it's always important to remember where you come from.
But in our budget and in our plans for education reform, we also ask this: We ask that in return for getting help, that you, the people of Montana, or the people of any State, develop an accountability system that says to the good taxpayers, "Our children are learning," an accountability system that will tell us whether or not progress is being made.
And finally, we have a word about education. We're making great progress in education. I know it's a subject dear to you all's hearts. It should be. Your industry thrives on not only capital, dollars and cents, but it also thrives on human capital. And our Nation must do a better job of educating all children.
The principles inherent in the reform package that we're moving through the Senate and the House are these: One, we expect there to be high standards in public education. To put it this way, every child can learn, and systems that don't believe so need to be changed.
And so we start early; we measure early; we provide money for remedial education. Every child counts, and every child can learn. And the whole crux of reform is accountability. And when we measure and find success, we'll praise it. But by measuring, you also—one can also detect failure, and that becomes the catalyst for reforms at the local level. We're going to make good progress on education.
And finally, I hope we'll be able to start a culture of responsibility, that all of us in this country must be responsible for the communities in which we live. I see Barksdale sitting over here. He is a person who sent a clear signal about what it means to be a responsible citizen by supporting public education, and I know many of you all in the audience feel the same way. But responsibility is not only sharing the wealth that has been generated in important programs, but it's also being responsible as a mom or a dad; responsible for activities that say to a child, "Somebody loves you"; responsible for encouraging mentoring programs in your companies or in your neighborhoods or in your churches or synagogues or mosques.
Today I want to give you a little more detail about some of my top priorities, the education and health and character of American children. My budget spends additional money on these goals and spends it in effective, creative ways.
The values of our children must be a priority of our Nation. So my budget invests in abstinence education and drug treatment. We create a new $67 million program that will make grants to faithbased and community organizations who mentor the children of parents in prison.
This is a long list, but I wanted to make a point: My budget is active and compassionate. Discretionary spending grows by a healthy, responsible 4 percent, enough to meet our needs. We fund goals like education, health, and defense. We reduce debt at a record rate. We set aside a fund for future emergencies. We then have enough money to provide broad tax relief, including relief from the marriage penalty and a doubling of the child tax credit.
I appreciate so very much Members of the United States Congress who are here, stalwarts when it comes to sound defense spending, strong advocates for tax relief, education reform: Congressmen Mary Bono, Duke Cunningham, Duncan Hunter, Darrell Issa, and Dana Rohrabacher. Thank you so much for coming here.
And I'm excited about what's coming down the pike. We're fixing to get a good education bill out—I hope the Senate moves it quickly—one that sets high standards, trusts local people to make the decisions for their children; one that embodies an Iowa concept of accountability, right in the core of the education bill.
But we've also got to make sure we have an education system that's focused on results, an education system that holds up every child, an education system that believes every child can learn. And so we worked with the United States Congress to pass meaningful, real education reform. It's a reform package that says not only should we set high standards, but we ought to trust local people to chart the path for excellence for every single child. It's an education plan that focuses on each individual by insisting that school districts and States measure, so that we know. The old way used to say, "How old are you? And if you're 10, we'll put you in the fourth grade, and if you're 12, we'll move you here, and if you're 14, gosh, you're supposed to be here." But once we get this bill out of the Senate and the House conference committees and on my desk, America will start to ask the question, "What do you know?" And if you don't know what you're supposed to know, we'll make sure you do, early, before it's too late. There are no second-rate children in America, as far as we're concerned, and there are no second-rate dreams.
And thirdly, in order for developing nations to be able to succeed, our nations and our friends must work hard to enhance education, fight disease. I reminded folks that we were the first nation to step up with contribution to the HIV/AIDS fund. We're part of the strategy. We will put more in as the fund shows success. I believe you're going to see that, at the G-7, there will be a strong commitment for more contributions from nations represented here at the table. We contribute nearly a billion dollars a year in international aid to HIV/AIDS; that's more than double the second-largest donor in the world.
I talked about the need for the World Bank and multilateral banks to have more grants for education and health, as opposed to loans. I said that our Nation will work to develop a teacher training program in Africa.
My point is, is that part of enhancing world prosperity and world freedom—that those of us who are fortunate nations must work together to provide opportunity: trade, better health, and better education.
It is unbelievable that on my watch and on the watch of the other leaders around the table that Africa, for example, suffers the pandemic that it does. And we must come together, and we must take this issue incredibly seriously and work together to help develop—help Africans develop a strategy of education, treatment, and cure that will work, and help fund it, and crank up our NGOs to go help. And I think the people will see the strategy and——
So at the summit, we'll be talking about how best to help the continent of Africa deal with HIV/AIDS, how best to make sure our aid and loans work well, and how best to encourage the habits of freedom, starting with good education.
Naturally, we discussed the issues that were raised at the G-8, issues of security, environment, education, security. And the issue here led us to discuss the world architecture of the 21st century and the way to improve civilization in the future.
That sounds pretty simple to people from the outside, but a lot of times in the political process, that's not the way it works. A lot of times, you have candidates running for office who say one thing, and they don't mean it. They go out and tell the people all across the State that they're going to do something for education, but they really don't mean it, or they can't get it done.
This is a man who has done in office what he said he would do. He's cut the taxes. He's made education a priority. And you need to send him back. You need to put him back in the statehouse. Plus, he married well. [Laughter] Frances is a great first lady for the State of Colorado.
Bill is going to work hard; I know. And he's going to run on a positive agenda; that's what the people want. He told me today on the airplane that although he's done a lot for education, he's going to continue to stay on education. And we're going to help him with a good bill out of Washington, DC, that will give more power and flexibility to the States. Education is his priority, and it needs to be his priority. It's the people's priority of the State of Colorado.
We passed an education bill that was one of my top priorities. It's a bill that's going to make our schools better. It's a bill that gives more flexibility at the local level. It consolidates programs. But it also does something that you've done here in Colorado: It challenges the soft bigotry of low expectations. It says, every child can learn. And we believe that we must measure to determine whether or not every child is learning.
Today we had the pleasure of going to an elementary school, first day of school. Gosh, it was exhilarating to shake hands with the first graders and the second graders that were just showing up. Their mothers and dads were thrilled to get them back in school, it seemed like. [Laughter] The teachers were great. They were all excited. And my message to the folks assembled there was this: that education is a domestic priority of mine. I know it's one of Pete's, as well. It's so important we get it right in America that every child gets educated.
We passed a good bill out of the House and a good bill out of the Senate. And I hope they don't play politics with it. They need to get the conference committee, get the bill resolved, and get it on my desk. And let me explain to you some of the principles involved in the education bill.
The sad thing is, too many of our children can't read. And I intend to do something about it. Not only have we targeted money for diagnostic tools to make sure we determine whether or not young children have got problems that we correct early, before it's too late, we've got teachertraining money; we've got intervention money. But the core of the education bill is accountability. The core of the education bill says that if you receive any taxpayer's money, you must measure. You must show us whether or not children are reading and writing and adding and subtracting.
I have a better idea. Let's abandon the old ways of gamesmanship, standoffs, and Government shutdowns. Let us keep our priorities straight and start with the things that matter most to our country's security and our country's future. This year, let us have responsible spending from day one and put the national security and education of our children first in line when it comes to the appropriations process.
A second area where we're making great progress is in public education. There is a good, strong reform bill that passed our House of Representatives and a good strong reform bill that passed the United States Senate. And when we come back, after the so-called vacation—[laughter]— people need to get the education bill to my desk.
And let me talk to you about it right quick. First of all, lest you think I forgot where I came from, one of the key components in the education bill is to trust the local folks when it comes to running public education. I strongly believe in local control of our schools. I don't believe Washington has got all the answers on how to run the schools. I do believe we need to pass power out of Washington, to give school districts more flexibility, more authority. And both these bills do that, and that's an important component of the bill.
But secondly, these bills challenge what I call the soft bigotry of low expectations. It recognizes that too often in our public education system, we lower the bar for students. Some folks believe, I guess, some kids can't learn. That's the opposite of what I think. I think every child can learn. I think we ought to have the high expectations. We expect high standards, and we expect people to deliver on those standards. And therefore, one of the key components of reform is to say to school districts, States all across our country, that if you receive Federal money, you must measure. You must devise an accountability system to let us know whether our children are learning to read and write and add and subtract.
The education bill is a good bill. I look forward to signing it. It is a sign that we're making progress on getting things done.
See, the first discussion we had was, we set the budget, the parameters, about the limits of spending. And now the Members of Congress are coming back, and they're going to actually commit taxpayer's money. And it's going to be an interesting discussion. Now, tomorrow my Office of Management and Budget will issue what's called a mid-session budget review and will show in plain terms that we have fully funded and will be able to fully fund our Nation's priorities, that we've got enough money to preserve and protect Social Security, that we'll pay down over $100 billion of public debt, that Medicare, all Medicare, every dime that comes into Medicare, will be spent on Medicare, and we can meet our priorities when it comes to our military and to education.
And finally—[laughter]—and finally, one of the temptations, and perhaps the greatest temptation of all, is what we call appropriations gamesmanship. And here's the way it works. We've got a budget of X amount, and you add up all the potential appropriations bills. The budget amount is X. And so they'll pass one bill of the 13, and they may add a little bit here. Then they'll pass another bill, all still within the budget. And they finally get to the last appropriations bills, and all of a sudden, if the budget amount becomes the appropriated amount, we busted the budget, because of all the previous bills have added a little here or there. And guess what generally is the last ones out? Defense—the defense bill. In other words, they'll put it on the President's desk and say, "You either get to bust the budget, Mr. President, or you have to choose between defense or perhaps education." That's gamesmanship. And that's not necessary, folks. That's not good to play with our national security or our national interests in educating every child.
And so what I expect and hope is that Congress will, at the very minimum, agree on the funding levels for defense and education early in the process, not late. This will be an interesting test of the priorities of the leaders of Congress. It will be an interesting test to see whether or not they agree with the administration that our true priorities begin with educating our children, and a true priority is the defense of our Nation. I'm confident we can work together, but it's going to require the people to help us watch the process. The people need to pay attention. And if you see the appropriations process dragging on and it looks like the old games of the past, we all need to blow the whistle. We all need to expect better out of Washington, DC.
And all I do is rest my case with the people. And the people wanted tax relief. The people want fiscal sanity in Washington. The people want all the money going into Medicare to be spent on Medicare, and that's what my budget does. And people also want a good defense for our country. And I hope, at the very minimum, the leadership in the Congress will give us the Defense appropriation number and the Education appropriation number early in the process, so that we don't rob defense or rob education by holding those appropriation bills late.
The President. The budget resolution number's a good place to begin. Because if we appropriate, of course, for the budget, we will not only be able to afford the tax relief, but we won't touch Social Security, and we will be able to fund the Nation's priorities, including education and defense.
You're right, the last administration was anxious for the Government to spend more money. I want the Government to spend the right amount of money. And we have achieved a good balance. It's not only money to fund priorities such as education, defense, and health care, but it is money available for the taxpayers. It's their money to begin with.
The President. No, I think if—the Mid-Session Review showed that the budgets we submitted not only are in balance but meet the priorities that I think are important, including defense and education.
And we hear a lot of dialog on the Hill about the importance of national defense. If that's the case, give us a number—at the beginning of the process, not at the end of the process. Let us know what the defense—I think it's realistic to ask Congress to prioritize national defense and education. We've done so. The budget that Mitch Daniels outlined clearly shows that we've got the monies available for a good, strong national defense.
Members of both parties are saying, well, we need to spend more, this, that, and the other. And that's good. What I hope they do is, they decide that the budget I submitted or the request I submitted for '02 is the right number and that they let us know that that's the number they will fund early, so that we avoid a fight, because I will fight for education funding and a national defense funding that I think is at the appropriate level. But fight isn't the right word yet.
The President. No, she was branched out from day one, as you—David, I'm surprised you didn't know that we made her—from the minute I got sworn in, she was the head of domestic policy, which means on every issue that has been in the domestic scene, she has been very much involved, whether it be Medicare reform or—she's doing a great job. Margaret is a very smart woman. You bet, she was an education person in Texas. But I realized how brilliant a woman she is, and she can handle just about every task we give her. So she's doing a good job. I've got a good team.
But I can't tell you how proud I am of Laura. When I married her, she was a public school librarian. [Applause] There's always one in every crowd. [Laughter] But like that public school librarian, she not only loves books; she loves children. And one of the things she is going to work with me on is to make sure that every child— I mean every child—in America gets a firstrate education by starting with making sure every child in America learns to read.
There's a bill that passed the House; there's a bill that passed the Senate. When they get back, I hope they don't play politics with the education bill. They need to get it to my desk quickly, so I can sign it and reform the public schools all across America.
And guess which—guess what usually has been saved for the last? The defense bill, leaving our national security at the mercy of budget games and last-minute cuts. This year, we might even see our administration's two highest priorities, education and national defense, being played off against each other.
That's the old way of doing business, and it's time to stop it. We may have different agendas in Washington, but we all have the same basic obligations. We must start with the things that matter most to the future and security of our country. This time, and from this time forward, let us put education and national defense at the first of the line, not at the last.
We have been working hard to fulfill another promise, and that's the promise of making sure every child in America gets a good education. A domestic priority of mine is to make sure every child—I mean every child—learns to read. I fully understand a literate child is one more likely to be able to learn. And yet, we've got to admit there's too many children that can't read in America.
Now, lest you think I forgot where I came from, inherent in the education bill that I proposed is this solid principle: I trust local people to run their schools. I would rather the people of Green Bay, Wisconsin, make the decisions on the public education than people in Washington, DC. So we passed legislation that has bills—has power coming out of Washington to empower local people to run the schools.
But inherent also in the education bill, as passed the House and passed the Senate—not only says we're going to spend more money, we're going to spend it more wisely. And in return for more money, we're going to ask the question, can our children read and write and add and subtract? We expect there to be accountability because by measuring, we will know. By measuring, we will make sure we correct problems early, before it's too late. By measuring, we will make sure that no child gets simply shuffled through the system.
And so we've got a plan that makes sense. And I call upon the House, and I call upon the Senate conferees to get together and get that education bill on my desk so I can sign it, so that public education fulfills its hope and promise for every child in America.
And I call upon the appropriators in Washington, DC, to let the country know the level of defense appropriations and the level of education appropriations early in the process, rather than late. These are national priorities, and they ought to be priorities of our appropriators in the Halls of Congress as well.
One is to make sure we get an education bill on my desk quickly. Many children are starting school today. Some have started prior to Labor Day. We need to get a bill. And Senator Lott worked with me very closely, and we got a good bill out of the Senate. I'm confident that the conferees can reconcile their differences and get a bill to my desk quickly.
And secondly, we're going to talk about the budget. There's been a lot of noise about the budget. I hope the budget—the appropriations process discards the old-style politics of trying to scare seniors. Our seniors have got to know that every Social Security promise will be fulfilled and Social Security checks will arrive on time and that there's not much difference in the overall numbers than what we proposed, what some others have proposed. I'm confident we can come together and get a good budget together, one that will reflect the priorities of the Nation, which will be education and defense.
The President. Well, you know, it's interesting—the question was, what kind of growth rate we need. I would put it this way: We need a new attitude, that in order to earn the confidence of the American people, Congress must set good priorities. And I know the Senator and I share the priorities of national defense and education. Those are our priorities, and we ought to meet those priorities.
I want to thank very much the Secretary of Education for being here with me. He's a fellow Texan who is doing a great job of running the Education Department. He helps herald our number one domestic agenda item, and that is making sure every boy and girl in America gets a good education.
And he's right. We hope Congress gets the business done and gets us a good education bill. They're close; all they've got to do is work a little harder to get us a bill, one that I can sign. I'm confident they will do so with a little extra work.
And so we're going to work hard to encourage other schools, other principals to sign up, other boys and girls to write letters. And one way that people who are interested in participating can do, they can call up on a web site to find out how to participate. And I'd like to give the address of the web site: It is www.friendshipthrougheducation.org; it is www.friendshipthrougheducation.org. And that's a way for other principals and parents and concerned citizens to participate in this outreach.
This new enemy seeks to destroy our freedom and impose its views. We value life; the terrorists ruthlessly destroy it. We value education; the terrorists do not believe women should be educated or should have health care or should leave their homes. We value the right to speak our minds; for the terrorists, free expression can be grounds for execution. We respect people of all faiths and welcome the free practice of religion; our enemy wants to dictate how to think and how to worship, even to their fellow Muslims.
In many countries of the world, especially in the poor countries, this problem exists and has acquired quite dramatic dimensions. To overcome this, one needs to develop specific gender-oriented programs that would include, primarily and first of all, questions related to proper education for women. And I would like to reiterate, there are many programs and many people devoted to implementing such specific, special activities for the benefit of women.
We're allies, too, in the economic front. The U.S. is our number one trading partner; cumulatively, our number one source of investments. And the Filipinos who live in America are number one in income earning and also number one in education. They are 3 million, and 1.5 of them are voters—1.5 million. So I know that they are very happy about this partnership.
President Bush. Well, I'm not quite that devious. I made the decision to name the Justice Department building after Robert Kennedy because he is deserving—his memory is—and his family are such a great part of American history. He was a wonderful Attorney General, and I think it's fitting to do such. I'll get an education bill based on its merits, not based upon renaming a building for a great American.
I look forward to the event. Mrs. Kennedy will be there, as are a lot of the Kennedy family. Senator Kennedy will be there; I presume that's who you were referring to about the education bill. I think Senator Kennedy wants to get a bill to my desk, and I feel good that we'll get a bill to the desk here pretty soon.
I'm getting ready to sign an education bill on Tuesday. My friends in Midland, Texas, will not believe it when they turn on C-SPAN or one of these other channels, because I am going to stand up and say to the Nation, one, this is a good piece of legislation, and two, I want to thank Senator Ted Kennedy for working on it with me. He's done a fine job. It shows what's possible when you set aside party— listen, I'm a proud party man, but I'm American first, and that's what we ought to be dealing with when it comes to legislation. And there are troubling signs that some in the Nation's Capital want to go back to the old ways, and I don't think we ought to let them do that. I think we ought to focus on what's good for the country.
We've made some good progress about working together. I'm getting ready to sign an education bill next week. It's a really good piece of legislation. I'm real proud of it. I want to thank the teachers who are here and the people who are concerned about educating our—making sure our public schools are the best they can be. And by the way, the cornerstone of that bill is that every child can learn—every child in America.
And a lot of my friends in Midland, Texas, are going to be amazed when I stand up and say nice things about Ted Kennedy. [Laughter] He deserves it. He worked hard on this education bill. And I can proudly sign it, and I can proudly say I appreciate Senator Kennedy's strong work and input into making this bill a good bill.
The President. Yes. Well, I was sitting in a schoolhouse in Florida. I had gone down to tell my little brother what to do, and—just kidding, Jeb. [Laughter] And— it's the mother in me. [Laughter] Anyway, I was in the midst of learning about a reading program that works. I'm a big believer in basic education, and it starts with making sure every child learns to read. And therefore, we need to focus on the science of reading, not what may feel good or sound good when it comes to teaching children to read. I'm just getting a plug in for my reading initiative.
The President. Thank you. First, let me tell you, I am a big believer in making sure our community colleges remain affordable, available, and flexible. And the reason I believe that is that I understand that the best way to make sure people have got the ability to work is for there to be a training—a retraining opportunity. In other words, communities must figure out how to match up a community college system with jobs that actually exist. It seems like to me, in order for America to be hopeful for everybody, we need to have flexibility, at some point, in the higher education system. And the best place for that flexibility to occur is at the community college level.
Now, higher education takes all kinds of—there's all kinds of different ways to achieve higher education. A community college system is one, a 4-year college; there's others. One of the things I think we need to do is expand the Pell grant system to help people afford higher education.
I appreciate so very much the spirit of unity here in Washington, DC, on this war. [Laughter] But we showed what's possible in Washington, what can happen in Washington, the last couple of days. I had the honor of traveling our country with George Miller of California, John Boehner of Ohio, Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, and Senator Ted Kennedy of Massachusetts. I signed an education bill that is a really good piece of legislation. It's a good piece of legislation because it enables and empowers Governors like Jeb Bush of Florida to continue to strive for excellence for every child. And it's a good piece of legislation because it shows what's possible in Washington, DC. Political parties are important, but they're not nearly as important as doing the Nation's business. And making sure every child is educated is a heck of a lot more important than the political parties that make up our political system.
Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start. Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no child is left behind. I was proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman John Boehner and Congressman George Miller; Senator Judd Gregg. And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend Ted Kennedy. [Laughter] I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say such a thing— [laughter]—but our work on this bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on results.
And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part of the world. So we will renew the promise of the Peace Corps, double its volunteers over the next 5 years, and ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education and opportunity in the Islamic world.
I'm proud of the work we did on an education bill. I know a lot of you here are concerned about your public schools, and so am I. I want the best, and so do you. I want to make sure every child learns and no child gets left behind. We worked well together. I said last night in the middle of the speech that I was proud to work with Republicans, proud to work with Democrats. I was even proud of the efforts—very proud of the efforts of Ted Kennedy.
A good job means good education. A good education means good jobs. In order to have good jobs, you've got to have a good education system. And so, therefore, we passed a good piece of legislation—provides more money for at-risk kids but also trusts the good people of North Carolina to make the decisions for the children of North Carolina. The people who care more about the children who live in Winston-Salem are the moms and dads and community leaders of Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
People, though, come up to me all the time and say, "Well, gosh, that's good. We're winning." I say, "We are, and we've got a lot more to do, and it's going to take a while." They say, "What can I do to help?" You know, you've heard me talk about this, probably, but I really, truly view this as a conflict between good and evil. And there really isn't much middle ground—like none. [Laughter] The people we fight are evil people. They have no regard for human life. They believe in tyranny. Their history has shown exactly what I'm talking about. Imagine a society where women are brutalized, children aren't educated, young girls have no chance of getting an education. It is a backward, barbaric point of view. And those are the kind of people—but the people we're after embraced that point of view.
I want to thank other locally elected officials for being here, and I particularly want to thank a member of my Cabinet. This man is a man who understands public education. He understands it well. You see, I picked him out of the trenches. I didn't find somebody, somebody who can talk theory to be the Department of Education— head of the Department of Education. I found somebody who has practiced. And when I asked him to join my team, he was the superintendent of the Houston Independent School District, a school district that was committed to make sure there was excellence for every child, and no child—I mean no child—would be left behind. Please welcome the Secretary of Education, Rod Paige.
We are on our way, after this chance for me to tell you about how I think things are going, to Booker T. Washington High School to talk about the need for folks to teach. I'm going to spend a little time at the end of this talk, talking about that. But Rod is here to highlight our passion and focus on education.
I'm so pleased that a member of my Cabinet came. I picked a good man when I picked the Secretary of Education. I didn't pick somebody who dwelt on theory. I picked on somebody who is experienced. You know, you have a chance to—got to choose all kinds of people when you pick your Cabinet. I wanted somebody who actually understood how public education worked because he had lived in public education. This man ran the toughest, biggest, orneriest school district in the State of Texas, the Houston Independent School District, and he did a great job there. And he's doing a great job as the Secretary of Education. I appreciate you.
Out of this evil came some incredible good. No one wished what happened on September the 11th happened. But out of evil came great good in the country, and I want to share some of that with you. The country has taken an assessment of what's important in life. We've kind of stepped back and said—one thing we've said in Washington is, politics is important, but it's not nearly as important as winning a war. Politics is important—listen, we're all politicians; anybody who's holding office saying they're not a politician isn't telling the truth—but at least we can put something greater than self; at least we can figure out how to do something more important than political party. And we did so, by the way, with an education bill.
This generation—this generation was given the gift of the best education in American history, yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book. And still this administration continues on the same old path, the same old programs, while millions are trapped in schools where violence is common and learning is rare.
On education, too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade to grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge. This is discrimination, pure and simple, the soft bigotry of low expectations. And our nation...[applause]
When these problems are not confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth, technology, education and ambition. On the other side of that wall are poverty and prison, addiction and despair. And my fellow Americans, we must tear down that wall.
This generation was given the gift of the best education in American history. Yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of ten fourth-graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book.
On education ... Too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade-to-grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge.
When these problems aren't confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth and technology, education and ambition.
Laura and I have been honored to host a discussion on an incredibly important subject, and that's education and reading. I really appreciate the Secretary of Education for coming, Dr. Rod Paige; and for educators, leaders from all around the country who've come here to the Roosevelt Room.
We're going to diagnose children early and correct problems when we find them. As importantly, I'm going to ask Congress to spend money on teacher training to make sure that our teachers, the heart and soul of the education system, have got the tools necessary to teach children to read.
I'm excited about working with the pros in the field of education. This is not a Republican issue; it's not a Democrat issue; it's not an independent issue; this is an American issue, and the most fundamental of all American issues. If the mission is to make sure the American experience touches every willing heart, every person in the country, it starts with making sure our children learn to read, and it starts with making sure children learn to read early. And one of the key initiatives that we have been discussing is, how do we make sure that we get science-based reading instruction to the youngest of the young? One way is to make sure that Head Start has a reading component as a part of its overall mission.
I've told the leadership that they should be expecting a strong education reform package, a tax relief package, and a Medicare and Social Security reform package and a package to help pay the folks in the military more money. And I can't wait to work with them to get the people's business done.
The President. Thank you all for coming this afternoon. I've had the honor of hosting a group of distinguished folks who have had experience with Government here, that happen to be of the Democrat persuasion. We had a discussion about— an advisory session about what to think about in Washington, about how to move issues such as education. We've spent a lot of time talking about education and how to get an education agenda moving forward in this important town.
And finally, we must all remember that we are here for a reason. You and I and the Vice President share the same goals for our country and the same commitment to achieving them. We are here to make progress. We are not here just to mark time. The next few weeks, we'll affirm the central policy goals of this administration, beginning this week with education reform. Everyone will know where we stand. Everyone will know where we're headed. Every morning I want you to remember these goals. Every evening I want you to review the progress we have made. I want it said of us, at the end of our service, that promises made were promises kept.
This is an important moment for my administration because I spent such a long amount of time campaigning on education reform. It's been the hallmark of my time as Governor of Texas. My focus will be on making sure every child is educated, as the President of the United States, as well.
Both parties have been talking about education reform for quite a while. It's time to come together to get it done so that we can truthfully say, "In America, no child will be left behind, not one single child."
Change will not come by adding a few new Federal programs to the old. If we work only at the edges, our influence will be confined to the margins. We need real reform. Change will not come by disdaining or dismantling the Federal role of education. I believe strongly in local control of schools. I trust local folks to chart the path to excellence.
But educational excellence for all is a national issue and, at this moment, is a Presidential priority. I have seen how real education reform can lift up scores and schools and effectively change lives. And real education reform reflects four basic commitments.
Secondly, the agents of reform must be schools and school districts, not bureaucracies. Teachers and principals, local and State leaders must have the responsibility to succeed and the flexibility to innovate. One size does not fit all when it comes to educating the children in America. School districts, school officials, educational entrepreneurs should not be hindered by excessive rules and redtape and regulation.
Flexibility in education spending is a special concern of Members of both parties with whom I've discussed. Today I had a good meeting with the chairman of the Education Committee in the House, John Boehner. I know he shares my passion for flexibility at the local level, as do people like Senator Judd Gregg or Tim Hutchinson.
Once failing schools are identified, we will help them improve. We will help them help themselves. Our goal is to improve public education. We want success. And when schools are willing to accept the reality that the accountability system points out and are willing to change, we will help them.
These four principles are the guides to our education reform package. Yet today I'm offering more than principles; I'm sending a series of specific proposals to the United States Congress, my own blueprint for reform. I want to begin our discussion in detail with the Members of the House and the Senate because I know we need to act by this summer so that the people at the local level can take our initiatives and plan for the school year beginning next fall.
I'm going to listen to suggestions from folks. If somebody has got a better idea, I hope they bring it forward, because the Secretary and I will listen. We've got one thing in mind: an education system that's responsive to the children; an education system that educates every child; an education system that I'm confident can exist; one that's based upon sound, fundamental curriculum; one that starts teaching children to read early in life; one that focuses on systems that do work; one that heralds our teachers and makes sure they've got the necessary tools to teach; but one that says every child can learn. In this great land called America, no child will be left behind.
The President. Good morning. I want to welcome you all. I particularly want to welcome senior Members of the Senate and the House. We're here today to discuss a domestic policy issue of high importance, and that's public education, how to make sure every child in America gets educated.
So if you look at the education proposals we submitted to the Congress, those are based on what I campaigned on. That's exactly what I told the people I would do, and that's what I'm here to remind the Members of the Congress. That's what I am going to do. And I can't wait to have an honest discussion about education, for example, the cornerstone of which is strong accountability.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is an honor to witness the swearing-in of a man who will help us see important reforms for education become reality.
The Vice President and I were so pleased to be invited and are pleased to be here in this important building. It is an important moment, and we certainly were not going to miss it. I wanted to see the beginning of a new era in public education.
My administration has no greater priority than education, and Dr. Paige and I share that urgency. And there's no greater champion of reform than the man I am about to witness be sworn in as the Secretary of Education.
Rod Paige gained his passion for education from his own background. His mother was a librarian, and his dad was a school principal. His three sisters have dedicated their careers to teaching and education. And we welcome them to this ceremony today.
In his distinguished career, Rod Paige has seen firsthand what works. He has not just talked about education reform; he's practiced it. And that's why I picked him. He has shown an ability to reach across party lines, to cross old divisions for the sake of our children. I value all these qualities, and our country needs them.
I'm also pleased the First Lady is here. I always used to say, you can always judge the nature of a man by the company he keeps. [Laughter] And I keep pretty darn good company—[laughter]—particularly when it comes to children and reading and education. She is a former public school librarian who loves children, who loves books, and has got the ability to combine the two. And I love her.
Dr. Shannon, thanks for coming. Those of us who have been involved with public education know this irrefutable fact, that the quality of a school depends on the quality of a principal; that when you find a good principal, the CEO of a school, you'll find a school that achieves what we all want: every child learning.
Secondly, and the reason we've come to Merritt, besides getting out of the White House—[laughter]—is to herald what happens inside the walls here. And what happens here is there is a strong sense of accountability, which means there is a strong sense of the possible. Accountability is so important. And by accountability I mean testing children to determine whether or not children are learning. I believe it's the cornerstone of reform. I believe it's the essence of excellence in education, and I believe it's important to do so, to test every year, to make sure children are not left behind.
Some say, "The accountability systems tend to restrict curriculum, that, oh, all the school will do is teach the test." This school proves that's not the case. This school focuses on basic education in reading and math. And by the way, they've got a fabulous curriculum for reading, one that works.
But this school also is a school that enriches beyond the basics of reading and math. It's a school that's got a curriculum that is focused on basic education, but it's a school also that understands the importance of the arts. It's a school that broadens the horizons of the students.
We're going to spend a lot of time talking about education until a bill works its way through the House and the Senate. It's a priority of mine, but the good news is, it's also a priority of the Members here around the table. And I am actually confident that we can forge an education bill that will achieve a lot of objectives: high standards, local control of schools, but the most important objective of all is that every child in America gets educated. It is a national priority, and it's a goal that I'm actually confident that this great Nation can achieve.
The President. I hope to have a good meal. [Laughter] I will tell you something about the cardinal-to-be and the other leaders I'll be meeting with. These are men of great faith, huge compassion for the poor and the oppressed. I can't wait to talk to them about education reform, because education to the cardinal-to-be is a paramount concern. He knows what we know: An educated child is one much more likely to realize the greatness of America. And I'm going to discuss that, and I'm there to listen, as well. It's a huge honor to go there, and I'm looking forward to it.
We've begun a series of policy initiatives. First is education. I've been meeting with mostly the senior Members of the House and Senate—although a few freshmen have shown up in the meetings—to hear about a vision that I think is so important for America, and that is, every child get educated and a way to do so.
The President. Let me—first of all, I want to thank my Governor friends for coming. From all around the country, people came—from Idaho, from the South. The head of the National Governors is here, and of course, the soon-to-be-head of the National Governors. I'm honored you all came. It's good to see you in a new setting—for me, at least. And we had a long discussion about education.
These Governors made education their number one priority in their State, and obviously they're keenly aware of the role of Federal Government. And we've had a really good discussion about how to make their jobs easier. And their job is to make sure every child gets educated, which is the noblest of all calling in America.
So I appreciate your coming. It's always good to be talking to people who know what they're talking about. And when it comes to public education, Governors really understand the subject. So I'm grateful you're here.
A week ago today I received a great honor and all the great responsibilities that come with it. The first order of business is education reform, and we have started strong.
On Tuesday I sent to Congress a package of reforms to turn last year's pledges into this year's laws. I want to make all of our public schools places of learning and high standards and achievement. Our country must offer every child, no matter what his or her background or accent, a fair start in life with a quality education.
This city has heard so much talk over the years about education reform. So many different approaches have been tried. So many new programs have been created. But we need more than a few new programs; we need a new way of thinking. We must go back to the fundamentals of early reading and regular testing, local control and accountability for results, clear incentives for excellence and clear consequences for failure. These are the elements of the plan I am proposing.
We're going to talk about education, and we're going to talk about taxes. We'll talk about the patients' bill of rights—a variety of issues that are of concern, and what we call front burner issues, issues that should be making it through the Congress soon.
We've had a wide-ranging discussion, discussed tax relief and how we can pay down national debt and have tax relief, which all of us around this table firmly believe we can do. We also discussed the fact that there's a lot of Americans who have got a lot of consumer debt, and we must be mindful of those hard-working Americans. And part of the tax relief package is to allow people to better manage their own finances with their own money. We had a discussion about education.
I think we'll have a good discussion about public education. While there may be some discussion about details, all of us surely believe the great hope for this country is to make sure every child—I mean every child—is educated. I look forward to sharing with the Members who don't know me well some of my experiences as the Governor of the State of Texas and what I've tried to do to fulfill that promise and fulfill that pledge.
We've had a lot of talk—early talk about education. I want to thank you all for your respective chairmen coming over and talking about education. This is not a Republican issue or a Democrat issue. This is of national concern, to make sure our public schools function. And we can apply some principles that I think we all agree with, which is high standards, expecting the best for every child, local control of schools, trusting local people to run the schools, and strong accountability systems but, as well, insist that there be results.
Gregory—David Gregory brought up a very important issue. It reminds me about how—it should remind you about how involved I'm going to be on pieces of legislation, whether it be patients' bill of rights or tax relief or education reform. I've got a lot of work to do here—to work with the Congress, to make sure that the principles that I think are important are inherent in these different pieces of legislation. I'll be making some trips, but I'm not exactly sure when I would be going to Africa, for example.
One of the reasons I came is, I think it's important for the Capital to stay focused on public education and public education reforms. One of the key ingredients in our package we sent up to the Congress is a reading initiative. I'm so impressed about what Ms. Dobbins is doing at this school, what the superintendent is insisting upon—accountability-based reading system.
And she told me that they've got a collaborative effort here with the National Institute of Health, which has developed curriculum based upon the science of reading. And it's impressive that the school and the District are willing to set high standards and ask the fundamental question, what works in education; are willing to implement curriculum that works; and then are willing to be held accountable for implementing the curriculum.
The President. We're not going to give a specific number today, but we are going to argue, make the case that we can slow the rate of spending down; that our spending will be based upon priorities, the priorities I campaigned on; that we will meet the objectives that I talked about in the campaign, which is protecting Social Security, funding public education, strengthening the military, paying down debt—and we'll be paying down debt; but that we believe the right number for the tax relief package is $1.6 trillion.
My budget will fund our priorities from education to defense to protecting Social Security and Medicare. It will pay down our national debt. And when we have done all that, we will still have some money left over. I strongly believe we should return that money, the leftover money, to you, the American people, in the form of tax relief. It is, after all, your money.
In addition to debt reduction and tax relief, we have some other important priorities, including a bold proposal to reform American education. Money isn't the whole answer. High standards and accountability matter most. But if we're serious about reforms, like early reading and teacher training, testing on reading and math in every school, the Federal budget must reflect these commitments.
Not long ago, agreement on debt reduction, tax relief, and education reform seemed impossible. But today, people in both parties are impatient with the status quo—with high debt, high tax bills, high energy bills, and falling education standards. This is our chance to act, and we cannot let it pass.
Today I was in St. Louis talking about education. There is no more important subject as far as I'm concerned, to make sure every child gets educated. I know the Yahngs feel the same way. But I also want to talk about the budget, the budget of the United States Government, and the budget of the people of the United States.
I'm going to submit a budget next week to the United States Congress. It is a budget that will set priorities, just like each family does in America—set priorities. My priorities will make sure that we preserve and protect and strengthen Social Security, so that there's a Social Security system available for the Yahngs and their children, and for you, as well. A priority in my budget will be to make sure that the health care system in America is strong for the elderly, for the uninsured, and for all of us concerned about health. A priority will be public education.
There are some certain principles to which we need to adhere in order to meet that goal: First, setting the highest of high standards; understanding that all children can learn; not accepting excuses when certain children don't learn; not adhering to a system that shuffles children through because it's so much easier to quit as opposed to focus on a child-by-child basis. Good education starts with high standards, whether it be set by the President, the Governor, or the superintendent or the principal or the teacher in the classroom.
I'm going to ask Congress to pass legislation that says that any school district which receives Federal money must design a test on an annual basis so that we know. It's the framework for addressing problems early, before it's too late. It says that consequences matter, but more importantly, if we set up the systems right, by disaggregating results, by treating each child as a person, not part of some overall group, we begin to have an education system that says each child matters, and we're going to track each child as he or she goes through the system. It's a critically important part of education reform.
Madam Superintendent, I promise you, I know where the great educational entrepreneurship of America lay, and it lay right here, in districts such as this one, and schools such as this one. It's trust in local people—it starts with trusting local people to make the right decisions. It's a system that is—in its framework, encourages reform when reform is needed and rewards excellence when excellence is found.
One of the things that I'm insisting that the Congress enact is a law that says that if you receive Federal money, you, the State, or the local jurisdiction, must measure to show us whether or not children are learning. The heart of education reform is accountability. The heart of making sure every child learns and no child is left behind is accountability. Because how do you know if you don't measure? How can you possibly judge whether or not a child is learning to read and write and add and subtract unless we know?
I got to know Rosa last summer when I was in your school district, and she knows what I know, that good education starts with high standards and the unfailing belief that every child can learn, regardless of their background or their circumstances; secondly, that local control of schools is paramount to change and excellence. It's important to empower the superintendents, like Rosa. She knows what I know, a great principal of a school is going to make an enormous difference as to whether or not children learn. One of the reasons we picked this school is because of Maria's guidance and leadership.
Part of the problem is Washington. People look at Washington and say, "Well, we've got all the answers up there." And the truth of the matter is, we don't, particularly when it comes to education. We may be able to provide some funding, so long as that funding is not so prescriptive that it hamstrings the ability for people to make decisions necessary—because I can assure you the schools in Columbus, Ohio, are really different from Laredo, Texas. The children are—they're to be loved, but we've got different challenges in different parts of the country. And that is why flexibility is important. And that's why specific programs that you'd like to see incorporated in the schools ought to be taken to the principal and not to some distant land called Washington, DC.
[Representative Tiberi complimented the President for his passion on the issue of education reform and stressed that all sectors should participate, not just the Federal Government.]
The spirit of reform, and as Pat said, the willingness for people to discuss this issue in an open way is going to really reinvigorate the public schools. And to say to our teachers, loud and clear, "We love you for teaching," and to say to our principals, "Thanks for being the catalysts, the educational entrepreneurs we need," to herald the great superintendents around the country that are making a major difference, that's what this is all about.
Governor Taft. And Congresswoman Pryce, as well; I think that she looks supportive. I think you're making some headway. And I just want to say this, we really appreciate the fact that you have come to Ohio to highlight your education program.
But with—the heart and soul of any education system, of course, are the teachers. And I want to thank those who are teaching. I'm sorry that my wife is not here with us today. If she were giving the speech—and most of you, if you had heard both of us, would rather hear her—[laughter]—she would say that one of her missions will be to convince Americans who are coming up to be a teacher. There's nothing more noble than to teach. And so, to the teachers of this school and the teachers throughout all of Tennessee, we thank you from the bottom of our hearts.
I also want to thank my friend, the chairman of the Education Committee, from the State of Ohio, Congressman John Boehner. I am so thankful the chairman is here. I'm going to be discussing education policy today, the framework for good policy, and it's going to require the leadership of John and—on the House side and Frist and others on the Senate side to get this bill through. So Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for not only being here—I'm surprised they didn't check you at the border coming in. [Laughter] But I'll let you on the plane so we can fly back together and talk policy.
There's no more important subject than public education. We must get it right to make sure no child is left behind. My philosophy is this: First, all of us in positions of responsibility must set the highest of high standards for every child. I believe every child can learn, and that ought to be indelibly etched into our national conscience, that every single child in America has got the capacity to learn and we should accept nothing less. And we must set high expectations for every child. We must raise the bar.
So I look forward to working with the Members of the House and the Senate to pass power out of Washington, to provide flexibility for the Federal funds so that the Governors, superintendents, principals can design programs that meet your specific needs. As the old adage, one size does not fit all in public education—it is very true. It is very true. We had the same goal in Tennessee and Texas, and that is, every child learn. But we've got different issues in Texas than you have in Tennessee, and that's why we need to have flexibility.
I don't support, my friends in Congress don't support the design of a national test. All a national test will do is undermine local control of schools. But we look forward to working with States and local jurisdictions to develop accountability systems that meet your needs so we achieve what we want. And that is an education system focused on each individual, an education system that diagnoses early and solves problems early.
A priority is going to be public education, as well. As a matter of fact, in the budget I submit, the largest increase of any department will be for the Department of Education. Federal funding for the Elementary and Secondary School Act will go up by $1.6 billion, an 8 percent increase in funding.
I think it's so important for us to prioritize public education. At the same time, we prioritize—make it a priority of making sure our money is spent well. A priority has got to be diligence when it comes to taxpayers' money. And that's why I'm confident the combination of an increase in spending coupled with education reform that holds people accountable is the right path for America to take.
I have a reasonable and balanced budget. It meets growing needs with a responsible rate of increase in spending. It funds priorities. And my administration has no higher priority than education.
The President. David, I—as far as this White House is concerned, it's time to go forward. I've too much to do to get a budget passed, to get reforms passed for education, to get a tax cut passed, to strengthen the military, than to be worrying about decisions that my predecessor made.
There's a lot of discussion about education reform on the Hill, and I'm confident that the focus will be the right focus. And my speech Tuesday night, I hope, will help keep the focus on the agenda.
In the budget, I prioritize education. I talked about that yesterday. We also prioritize the health care needs. We recognize the Federal Government plays a very important role in researching cures for disease, and therefore, our budget increases the NIH budget for 2002 by $2.8 billion, the largest increase in that Department's history.
And I should say also that I don't think if you look at the problems that are on the President's agenda, even his domestic agenda now in terms of the economy, in terms of some of the things—we actually had a brief conversation about education policy when we were on our walk together—I think there are some interesting things happening that—there's a good dialog on some of these things, too. So I'm sorry to disappoint you.
The Federal budget is a document about the size of a big city phone book and about as hard to read from cover to cover. The blueprint I submit this week contains many numbers, but there is one that probably counts more than any other: $5.6 trillion. That is the surplus the Federal Government expects to collect over the next 10 years, money left over after we have met our obligations to Social Security, Medicare, health care, education, defense, and other priorities.
The plan I submit will fund our highest national priorities. Education gets the biggest percentage increase of any Department in our Federal Government. We won't just spend more money on schools and education; we will spend it responsibly. We'll give States more freedom to decide what works. And as we give more to our schools, we're going to expect more in return by requiring States and local jurisdictions to test every year. How else can we know whether schools are teaching and children are learning?
We've just lived through a decade of the most exciting, important things done by government have been done by Governors. In 7 years, you've reduced welfare rolls by more than half, improved millions of the lives of your fellow citizens by helping them find work. You brought new meaning to crime prevention programs. You pioneered education reforms, and many of you have shown how tax relief can reenergize State economies.
A budget's impact is counted in dollars but measured in lives. Excellent schools, quality health care, a secure retirement, a cleaner environment, a stronger defense: These are all important needs, and we fund them. The highest percentage increase in our budget should go to our children's education. Education is not my top priority— education is my top priority, and by supporting this budget, you'll make it yours, as well.
Reading is the foundation of all learning. So during the next 5 years, we triple spending, adding $5 billion to help every child in America learn to read. Values are important, so we've tripled funding for character education to teach our children not only reading and writing but right from wrong. We've increased funding to train and recruit teachers, because we know a good education starts with a good teacher.
Critics of testing contend it distracts from learning. They talk about teaching to the test. But let's put that logic to the test. If you test a child on basic math and reading skills and you're teaching to the test, you're teaching math and reading. And that's the whole idea. As standards rise, local schools will need more flexibility to meet them, so we must streamline the dozens of Federal education programs into five and let States spend money in those categories as they see fit.
Steven and Josefina tell me they pay almost $8,000 a year in Federal income taxes. My plan will save them more than $2,000. Let me tell you what Steven says: "Two thousand dollars a year means a lot to my family. If we had this money, it would help us reach our goal of paying off our personal debt in 2 years' time." After that, Steven and Josefina want to start saving for Lianna's college education.
So we ask the question, do you know how to read? And if you do, we'll praise the teachers. And we always have got to praise the teachers. But if our accountability system shows that children are not learning to read, instead of sitting by and saying, "Oh, maybe something positive will happen," it will serve as a go-by; it will serve as an opportunity for us to say, "Let's solve the problems early before it's too late." There are no second-rate children in America, and there are no second-rate dreams. So our budget prioritizes education with the understanding, however, that the schools will be run at the local level.
Oh, I know that doesn't sound like a lot of money to folks that are rolling in dough. But $2,120 means a lot to the Ojeda family. It means a lot when you're paying high energy bills. It means a lot when you are worried about the education of your three children. It means a lot when you want to save. It means a lot when you want to do your duty as a mom and a dad to prepare for your children's future. No, $2,120 is a significant amount of money. It's the right thing to do for America.
It starts with slowing down the rate of discretionary spending. In our budget, there are entitlement programs that are going to trigger spending, whether or not we—the Congress has no say, because people are entitled to money; they'll get the money. Social Security, for example, it set aside all the payroll tax for Social Security. Medicare is taken care of in the budget. We double the Medicare budget over the next 10 years. Discretionary spending like education, it will go up under my plans. [Applause] And it's right that it does go up. I'm glad to know there's a ground swell for support. [Laughter]
The President. You know, I'm constantly amazed that—first of all, one of the things that happens when you talk about tax relief, people immediately go to the class warfare argument that "only the rich people will benefit," which obscures reality. And reality is, $1,980 is a lot of money. And I'm not going to ask you what you're going to do with it, because I trust you to do the right thing with it. Frankly, it's none of the Government's business about what you decide to do with your own money. But I bet it may have something to do with your children's future education, for example.
Mrs. Berger. And on a personal note, I'm glad to hear that your tax reform will refund almost $2,000 for our family for education and our needs.
[Mr. Berger said he was interested in education reform and impressed that the President would increase spending for reading.]
The President. I am. You all know I used to be a Governor, and therefore, I'm a little suspect about Federal involvement in any way, shape, or form in education. I do, however, think that it is appropriate for the Federal Government to spend money, so long as it's spent wisely. I can't think of anything more important than to increase the amount of money available at the Federal level for reading programs, so long as the strategy makes sense.
The State of Pennsylvania can design the remedies. They can design what remedies will ultimately make a difference in terms of creating educational excellence. The Federal Government ought to be focused on some targeted spending but also understanding that systemic reform will yield positive results for children from all walks of life. It is an incredibly important debate that is taking place in Washington.
You will hear much of the dialog that will be all focused on dollars, and that's an important part of the debate. But the truth of the matter is that Federal Government only funds about 7 percent of the education budgets in aggregate across the Nation. Most funding, as you well know, in Pennsylvania comes from either State Government or local property taxes. And that's where the power ought to be. It ought to be closest to the people who are paying the bills in order to make sure that schools chart the path to excellence necessary so every child learns.
But at the Federal level, we can institute structural reform or insist upon changes that will eventually yield to structural reform, and that's what the whole educational debate is about. And it's an important debate in America, and I'm really glad we've engaged early on that subject in the Senate and the House. You got more than you wanted.
I can't tell you how much I appreciate Senator Zell Miller standing up side by side with the President. Oh, I know he's a Democrat, and of course, I'm a Republican, but both of us put America first. And this budget is an American budget, because it sets priorities. It is a budget that sets important priorities, starting with the education of our children.
I'm counting on you, when you find a neighbor in need, to reach out a hand, and say, "What can I do, brother or sister, to help you?" I'm counting on you to run a Boy Scout troop and to teach our children right from wrong. Our Nation counts on people who have got good heart and good will to say, "What can I do to make my neighborhood a better place," instead of hoping that the Federal Government, in its infinite wisdom, waves a magic wand and there's educational excellence in every school in Georgia. We need the good citizens of these communities to get involved with public education, to make sure our teachers are supported, excellence is demanded, accountability is in place so no children are left behind. No, I'm counting on you.
A point I'm trying to make to the people of Georgia and will make around the country is, the first job of a President is to set priorities. Not only are these, the items I just talked about, priorities, so is public schools. It's a priority. As a matter of fact, the largest increase in my budget is for public education.
However, I'm mindful of the fact that the Federal Government is only a partial provider of funds and should never run the schools. I strongly advocate and strongly will fight for local control of schools. One size does not fit all when it comes to the education of children.
This is an interesting place to talk about diagnosing problems, right here in a hospital. Well, we need to do the same thing in education, particularly in the early years. We must diagnose whether or not a child has deficiencies in reading, for example, and solve them early—and solve them early. And that's the whole spirit of reform that we're proposing.
Again, I just want to repeat, please don't hope that the Federal Government is going to wave a magic wand and there will be educational excellence. As a matter of fact, it's less likely there will be educational excellence if there's power in Washington, DC, because the schools in Georgia are different in many ways from the issues that face Texas schools. And so we should not try to federalize education, but there are some things we can do by spending money wisely and insisting upon local control of schools and accountability.
And so I'm so honored that you all are giving me a chance. It's an educational experience for me. It's a heartening experience for me, and it's a chance for me to move around the country, to get outside of Washington and sit face to face with real Americans who are working hard for their families, love their kids, love their country.
One thing that our governments must do is set priorities. Without priorities, there is haphazard spending. The job of a President is to set clear priorities. A priority of mine is public education. It was a priority of mine as the Governor of the State of Texas. It is a priority of mine as the President. I understand, however, that even though it is a priority, that does not mean Washington, DC, should run public schools. And so I look forward to working with Members of the Congress to pass power out of Washington to provide flexibility so local jurisdictions can help design the strategies necessary to make sure that every child in America gets educated.
And so we'll have a wide-ranging discussion here about education. And it's an important discussion to have. But I want to put it in the context of an overall budget.
And so we've set priorities. And we'll argue about whether or not the priorities are the right priorities. Some of them are going to say up there, "Well, you know, he didn't put enough in for education," or "He didn't put enough in for the military, didn't put enough in for here or there." Those are sometimes—are the people who aren't responsible for viewing the budget in its entirety. And that's okay. Everybody's entitled to an opinion, and there's a lot of them in Washington.
So I appreciate so very much the opportunity to not only make the case for education reform. And this school gets it. And evidently you get it, too, Governor, because the idea of insisting upon accountability as the cornerstone for reform makes eminent sense. We'll argue about the remedies for failure, we'll argue about what the consequences for failure are, but the truth of the matter is, the whole reform system begins by measuring, by holding people accountable, by holding up success so that we know whether or not the reading curriculum that has been put in place here works. The principal assures me it does, and the reason she's able to say so with certainty is because you measure. And therefore, another school that may have trouble cheating—treating their children how to read will be able to say, "Well, let's see how they do it here." We can prove that it works.
Your program does exactly that. I credit you, and I applaud you for your interest in parents and strengthening the family, in character education. Our teachers oftentimes feel unsupported at that level, and your programs are going to help them get that support they need.
Mr. Benson. Well, that money that I save—my priority is education for my children. I was going to put that money toward education, but I could put it towards something else because I know here at Lakewood Elementary, Ms. Lowe and her staff are doing great things to make sure my son has a quality education. And with the spending that you are proposing for the school, I'm just excited to see what Ms. Lowe and her staff has in store for my son for a quality education.
And that's going to be an incredibly important component of the reform, that we say each child matters and therefore the accountability systems must reflect the performance of each child, not kind of groups, collections of children. And the systems will then begin to emerge to individualize education.
Today we went to a computer lab, where the reading programs were constantly adjusting based upon the skill level of the participant on the computer. It's the forerunner of the individualization of education, the likes of which a lot of us have not imagined here before. It begins with an accountability system that measures on a per-child basis, so when we get up to Washington, we cannot let the whole concept of accountability be undermined by not—by a system that does not measure on an individual child basis. And that's exactly what I'm going to insist happens.
And so I think one of the ways to try to get the number up toward the 40 percent that was promised by the Federal Government years ago, is to be—is to have a commonsense approach, Raymond, and to give flexibility—well, I appreciate that, Jim. The reading program will help. It will help make sure the children get a good start on their education early. And so will the Head Start program, and the Head Start initiative.
The President. Well, I thought I could do a better job than anybody else that was running for President. I was concerned about a country that was becoming too bitter at times. I'm concerned that the American Dream, the idea that you can be— have a dream and work hard to achieve it might not have—is bright for everybody in America, as I hoped. I'm worried that the education system in some places isn't working, concerned about a military that— the morale in the military wasn't high enough. I think we need to have a strong military to keep the peace. So I had some reasons for running, and now I'm working to achieve them.
One of the reasons I've come to your school is to be able to talk about education. I'm also talking about a budget plan. One of the things a President does is submit a budget to Congress—"Here's where we ought to spend money, here's where we ought to"—and if you have any money left over, I'm arguing we ought to give it back to the people who pay taxes, like the teacher right here.
And it's important. Take a matter like education. One of my priorities as the Governor of Texas was education; one of my priorities as the President is to make sure every child gets educated. But I can assure you, this administration understands the importance of local control of schools. And we don't believe in the federalization of the public school system, that one size does not fit all when it comes to education.
Many of you all know the debates oftentimes, on important matters like education, revolve around who spends the most money. And the truth of the matter is, the Federal Government's got a limited role when it comes to the expenditure of taxpayers' money in public schools. I mean, we fund about 7 percent of the total budgets across the Nation.
But there is an important role for the Federal Government, particularly for disadvantaged children. And so we've increased our education budget by more than any other Department in the Federal Government. The debate here of course will be, "Well, it's not enough." But for those who argue that, sometimes they're not— they don't have to do what the executive branch does, which is to present an overall budget, to make it work. And that's what I want to explain to you all, how our overall budget works.
I approach our budget as American families do. First, we set priorities and funded them. My top priority is education reform, and I have asked that the Department of Education receive the largest percentage increase of any Federal agency. We increase funding for our reading programs and character education and recruiting good teachers. This time around, however, we won't be just spending more money; we will be setting higher standards and expecting real results for all our children.
And here it is: One, have sound budgeting in the Federal Government. It's to say to the spenders in Washington, DC, "Here are the priorities for our country." A priority is educating children. And let me—as an aside, as I continue to praise the mayor—he has done a good job of setting high standards, strong accountability in the schools of Chicago. So a priority of mine is public education. I believe every child—every child—ought to be educated and not one child left behind.
The President. We talked about just about everything. We talked politics, of course, and we talked about issues that face Chicago. He gave me a lot of good advice—want to pay attention to the big-city mayors. And I told him we've got a lot in common. We're both problem solvers, the kind of people that when we identify a problem, we try to work hard to solve it. And that's what the mayor's reputation has been. I also thanked him for the good work he's done on education reform here in Chicago.
The President. It suggests that—first of all, the data shows the economy is sputtering. Secondly, it suggests strongly that the taxpayer is being overcharged. And one of the things this administration is going to do is going to go to the Congress and say, "Here are the priorities: Our priorities are public education, the military, Social Security and Medicare, health care for the working uninsured." But by having commonsense budgeting, we're going to also show the people that there is ample money for them to be able to spend. And that's going to be very important to make sure the sputtering economy recovers.
Not only today do we have good news out of the House of Representatives, but the Senate Education Committee passed our education reform package 20 to 0. We're making progress because these pieces of legislation are right for America. These aren't political documents; this is public policy that's good for American families and American children.
So education is one of our priorities. We've increased spending for education, but we've also insisted upon more flexibility so Governors and local folks can use Federal dollars to meet their specific needs. One size does not fit all when it comes to the education of American children.
First, educating our children is a important priority for our Nation. So we spend money on public education—but I always remember where I came from. I hope you don't get too nervous, Governor, because I have always believed and will always believe in local control of schools. And so, while the Government will spend money, we've got to trust you to run your schools.
We can argue about budgets, but that's not the greatness of America. The greatness of America is our people, the fact that we've got people who care about somebody. And so I urge you, become a Boy Scout or Girl Scout leader to teach a youngster right from wrong. I urge you— I urge you, don't hope that Washington fixes schools; don't hope that the Federal Government waves some magic wand to make the schools better. Get involved with your education systems here at the local level. Thank a teacher, thank a principal for their hard work. If your church, your synagogue, or mosque, you're looking for something to do, find a program that will help mentor a child. Put your arm around somebody. It says, "We love you." America is meant for—you know, the greatness of this country lies in the hearts and souls of our citizens.
My overall budget plan funds important priorities like education. It pays down our national debt at a record rate. It sets aside nearly a trillion dollars in a contingency fund for future needs and emergencies. And we still have surplus money left over for broad, fair, responsible tax relief.
A second priority has been education. Now, we've increased the budget at the Federal level, but Governor, don't be too nervous. I remember where I come from. I believe in local control of schools. I strongly believe we ought to pass power.
I know the secretary of education is here. It's good to see you, Charlie. The reason I mention Charlie is, I believe that the people who care more about the education of the children who live in the Panhandle of Florida than anybody else are the citizens of this part of the State. I know the Governor understands that. I know Charlie understands that. And the people in Washington have got to understand that. And that's why I look forward to working with Congress to pass power out of Washington, to provide as much flexibility with Federal money at the local level as needed, so that you all chart the path to excellence, so you figure out whether or not children are learning and, if not, make sure they do.
The temptation in Washington is to say, one-size-fits-all will work. But we know better than that. One size doesn't fit all when it comes to the education of our children. There needs to be local control of schools. There needs to be strong accountability measures. And when we find failure, we've got to free parents to make different choices for their children.
We got a good piece of legislation moving out of the Senate in terms of education, which I'll talk about in a little while. I mean, we're showing people around the country that it's possible to have a culture of positive achievement in the Nation's Capital, and for that I'm grateful. And I want to thank the Members of Congress who are willing to work together to get some positive things done on behalf of the people.
And it means setting priorities. It's important for the President to set priorities, to set clear priorities so that Congress doesn't overspend or get exuberant, in their attempts to get reelected, with your money. And so some of my priorities are these: Education is a priority; I think it's incredibly important. So we've increased the education budget by a significant amount of money.
Oh, I've heard all the arguments about accountability. Some say, "Well, we can't measure. The Federal Government does not have a role in education and, therefore, should not insist upon results." I disagree. We're results-oriented people in this country. And in return for taxpayers' money, we ought to insist upon results.
Education is a priority, and we need to focus on education. But I also remember where I came from. It's one thing to spend money at the Federal level; it's another thing to make sure we understand how to achieve educational excellence for every child. And that means trusting local folks to chart the path to excellence. The people who care more about the children in a respective community are the people who live in the community. And so while we'll focus some Federal resources, we need to trust the local people by passing power out of Washington, DC, to run their public schools in America, and at the same time, we've got to insist upon results.
We've made it clear that education is important. We made it clear that health care is important. We made it clear that retirement systems are important, and we grew the discretionary spending by 4 percent. Now, the reason there is some hollering up here is because last year they grew the discretionary budget by 8 percent. It's unbelievable how much money they spent on the way out of town. And we're saying, let's be realistic with the people's money.
And I've got a great staff, as well. And I appreciate Margaret LaMontagne being here. Margaret's the Domestic Policy Adviser to the President. And I've known her a long time. She's plenty capable, and she's spending a lot of time on education, which is one of the subjects I want to discuss with you today. And I appreciate you, Margaret.
I also want to thank Bonnie for your hard work and for putting this on. And I want to thank you all for coming. I know you all are going to Capitol Hill today. I hope you help us deliver a couple of messages. One is going to be on education. Another is on commonsense budgeting and tax relief, and why it's important to all people, particularly those who have decided to invest capital in the private sector. And I want to explain why this tax relief package will spur economic activity and entrepreneurship in America.
First, let me talk about education. I said it was my priority in the campaign. It is our priority in this administration. An educated child is one much more likely to realize his or her dreams. And we've got to do a better job of making sure every child—I mean every child—is educated.
And there are some solid principles involved with our education plan. One of them is setting high standards and high expectations for every child. We believe if you have low expectations, you get lousy results. If you believe in the best in every single child and set high expectations, good folks will follow.
Thirdly, we believe strongly in a resultsoriented system. A lot of times in education, people focus on process. We think the world needs to start focusing on results. People need to start asking the question, "What do you know," not "How old are you?" In a world that asks the question, "How old are you," oftentimes people just get shuffled through regardless of what they know. "If you're 12, you're here. If you're 14, you're here," and "Let's just move you through." And those of us who have been involved in public education know full well who gets left behind: children whose parents don't speak English as a first language, for example; inner-city kids. It's so much easier to quit on children. We strongly believe that by insisting upon results, it will begin to change the mentality of public schools all across America.
And so, one, we've asked for more money for our budgets. We've increased education spending quite significantly. And we've said, in return, however, we expect States and local jurisdictions to measure, to show us whether or not students can read and write and add and subtract, to focus on every child since every child matters. We've got to end the process-oriented world of public schools.
So we've got an education vision that says, there will be more money in the system, but let's make sure that we have high standards, local control of schools, and strong results-oriented systems. I firmly believe that when we get the system right, the results will begin to improve dramatically. And we've targeted some money. We've set aside $5 billion for a national reading agenda. It's not the Federal Government telling you what to do but the Federal Government saying, "Here's money available for K-through-two diagnostic tools, so that we can determine early in a child's career where that child may need extra help."
So that's the education plan. Oh, there's a lot of discussion you'll hear about, "We can't measure. It's too much Government to measure." I just disagree. If we're spending money, we ought to get results for the money. But this isn't a national test; this is a test where local folks will design the test. The great State of Pennsylvania can design its own test. Texas designs its own test. But there needs to be a sense of accountability in the system. And then you'll hear people say, "It's racist to test." It's racist not to test. It's racist not to hold people accountable. Those who say it's racist to test must assume that certain children can't learn. We don't believe that. We believe all children can learn.
So the principles involved in the education reform are sound and solid, and they reflect what I hope you all agree with, that there is a better way. We need to challenge the status quo when we find our children trapped in schools that are just not going to teach and won't change.
My budget funds our Nation's important priorities, including many health care priorities. We increase funding for education and for military pay and benefits. We set aside $2.6 trillion of payroll taxes over the next 10 years for Social Security and for only Social Security. We double funding for Medicare over the next 10 years and make sure that every dime that comes in for Medicare is spent only on Medicare.
And for those of you involved with the education system in America, thank you for your hard work. For those of you who are the administrators, thanks for providing great education. For those who give your hard-earned dollars to support the education systems around America, please continue to do so. [Laughter] Isn't that right, Bishop? [Laughter] It's an incredibly important part of the mosaic of a hopeful tomorrow.
So we sent up a commonsense budget to the Congress. I say "commonsense" because it sets priorities. When you run your businesses, you set priorities. That's sometimes the definition of success, is somebody who figures out how to set priorities and stay on those priorities. And that's what we did; we set some clear priorities. We funded public education, increased the funding of public education. It's the biggest increase of any Department in my budget.
Now, lest you forget where I came from, it's one thing to provide money at the Federal level, but I can assure you I'm a strong supporter of local control of schools. I believe that the best way to run the schools is to trust the local people. So we're increasing spending, but we're going to also increase power at the local level. One size does not fit all when it comes to the education of the children in America. We've got to have local control of schools; we've got to align authority and responsibility at the local level. And I'm working with Congress to do that.
But one of the cornerstones of reform for education is to hold people accountable for results. I'm a strong believer that in return for the receipt of taxpayers' money, States and local jurisdictions must develop accountability systems to tell us whether or not children can read. It's in your best interests, by the way, that we have a literate tomorrow. You're irrelevant if people can't read. [Laughter] And we need to start figuring out whether they can or cannot, early in a child's career. And so, the only way to do that is to measure.
And you mark my words, when you have a system based upon the principles of high accountability and high—of high standards and strong accountability and local control of schools, children will learn. And that's what this country needs. They need an education system that's responsive, results-oriented, that focuses on each child as a child, that challenges the process-oriented system that asks the question, "How old are you? Oh, if you're 10, we'll just put you here. And if you're 14, you go here. And if you're 16, you go here." It's time in America we start asking the question, "What do you know?" And if you don't know what you're supposed to know, we're all going to come together to make sure you do, early, before it's too late.
So the priorities in the budget I submitted are these. One, educating our children is a priority. The biggest increase of any Department in my budget goes to the Department of Education. I want you to also understand, though, I remember where I came from. I came from a State—I was a Governor—I firmly trust local folks to run the schools. The people who care most about the children in the State of Maine are the citizens of Maine. And the Federal Government, while it increases spending, must trust the Governors and local authorities. One size does not fit all when it comes to educating children. So we increased spending. But I look forward to working with the Senators and the Congressmen of the—pass power out of Washington, to provide a maximum flexibility so that the Governors and school board folks can take money and meet and match them to the needs that exist. So step one is an accountability—step one of a education reform program is local control of schools. It is a redline for me when it comes to Federal legislation.
The greatest gifts of Greece, however, to this country are the immigrants it's sent, men and women who enrich our Nation with their spirit. They're the models of community and enterprise, of family, of education and public service. And we honor Greek independence. And as we honor Greek independence, I also want to honor the Greek contribution to our national character.
One of the reasons I've come to this State is, not only is it a special spot in my heart because of an address down the road here, but this is a State where accountability and education go hand in hand. And in no way, shape, or form would I want Federal policy to undermine the good work that Governor King and others in Maine have done.
The President. Yes. I know there's—I'm aware that there was some consternation about proposals that I'm working with both Republicans and Democrats on in the Congress. People have got to remember I was a Governor, and I wasn't particularly happy when the Federal Government began to tell us what to do, particularly when it came to educating our children. And consistent in the plans that I'm working with the Congress on is that philosophy that we trust the local people. And the people of Maine have been very fortunate to have a Governor of this caliber to look after the public education system here.
My budget is compassionate. It dedicates $238 billion to Medicare next year alone, enough to fund all current programs and to begin a new prescription drug benefit for low-income seniors. It protects all 2.6 trillion of the Social Security surplus for Social Security and for Social Security alone. It increases spending on education substantially. It provides tax credits to help low-income people buy health insurance. It adds funding for medical research, and it gives our men and women in uniform a $1 billion pay increase.
Education is a priority in my budget. Our education budget—the Department of Education received the largest increase of any Department in our budget request to the Congress. It's one thing to ask for more money, but it's always important to remember where you come from.
But in our budget and in our plans for education reform, we also ask this: We ask that in return for getting help, that you, the people of Montana, or the people of any State, develop an accountability system that says to the good taxpayers, "Our children are learning," an accountability system that will tell us whether or not progress is being made.
A major priority is education. The biggest increase of any department is in the Department of Education. But I also want you to know, even though we're asking for more money to be spent in Washington, I'm not asking for more power. As a matter of fact, I want there to be less power in Washington, because I strongly believe in local control of schools. I believe that Washington ought to trust the local people to make the right decision for the schools. People closest to the problem are those best able to address—[applause].
You've heard a lot about some issues that relate to schools in this area. Don't be looking for Washington for the solutions. We may be able to help with some funding, but the government that is closest to the people is that more likely to be able to address problems. And as a former Governor, I understand one size does not fit all when it comes to education. The issues between Texas and Missouri are different, and they darn sure were different within my own State. And so we need more flexibility at the local level, less power in Washington.
I don't want there to be a Federal test. I don't want the National Government to undermine local control of schools. But I do think society ought to ask the question, are the children learning? And if they are, we ought to applaud and thank principals and teachers. But if not, we ought to correct the problem early, before it's too late. It's time for a new attitude when it comes to the education of our children, particularly starting in Washington, DC.
And I think we're making good progress. There's a new spirit of accomplishment in Washington, DC. And I think we're making good progress on an education bill. Both Republicans and Democrats are coming together to adhere to a set of principles that will encourage educational excellence.
This is a budget that sets priorities: Defense is a priority; education is a priority; health care is a priority. I readily concede we don't try to be all things to all people in our budget, however, but we do increase discretionary spending by 4 percent. And this creates the rub in Washington. There are some who think 4 percent is too small. I can understand why, because during the last budget cycle the Congress spent— raised the discretionary spending by 8 percent.
What makes productivity go up? Well, you know as well as anybody, it's education and investment. If our productivity is to continue to grow, our people must know more tomorrow than they know today. They must read better. They must calculate faster and more accurately. They must understand science more deeply. So our education policies must insist upon results. We must be bold enough to measure our children's progress. We must hold schools accountable. And we must give parents and children better options if our schools fail to teach and will not change.
But we submitted a budget that sets priorities. It doubles Medicare. It sets aside all the payroll taxes for Social Security. It focuses in education. It pays the people who wear the uniform of the military more money. But I think it's important—we pay down $2 trillion of debt. There's $1 trillion set aside over the next 10 years for contingencies, and there's still money left over. And I strongly urge the United States Senate to remember where that money came from. It's the people's money, and we need to send it back to the people who pay the bills in this country.
And finally, we have a word about education. We're making great progress in education. I know it's a subject dear to you all's hearts. It should be. Your industry thrives on not only capital, dollars and cents, but it also thrives on human capital. And our Nation must do a better job of educating all children.
The principles inherent in the reform package that we're moving through the Senate and the House are these: One, we expect there to be high standards in public education. To put it this way, every child can learn, and systems that don't believe so need to be changed.
And so we start early; we measure early; we provide money for remedial education. Every child counts, and every child can learn. And the whole crux of reform is accountability. And when we measure and find success, we'll praise it. But by measuring, you also—one can also detect failure, and that becomes the catalyst for reforms at the local level. We're going to make good progress on education.
And finally, I hope we'll be able to start a culture of responsibility, that all of us in this country must be responsible for the communities in which we live. I see Barksdale sitting over here. He is a person who sent a clear signal about what it means to be a responsible citizen by supporting public education, and I know many of you all in the audience feel the same way. But responsibility is not only sharing the wealth that has been generated in important programs, but it's also being responsible as a mom or a dad; responsible for activities that say to a child, "Somebody loves you"; responsible for encouraging mentoring programs in your companies or in your neighborhoods or in your churches or synagogues or mosques.
The work begins where opportunity usually begins, and that's in the schoolhouses. I have made public education the number one priority of this administration for a reason: Because when we get it right, when every child learns, America will be a much more hopeful place.
Today, all the children—there was a day when all the children couldn't enter schools. Some of you may remember that. I'm not trying to age you. [Laughter] As a result of a lot of hard work, that has changed. All children can enter schools, but the fundamental question now is, once in school, will all children learn? And that's the question all of us must ask. And if not, we must insist on change—we must insist on change. I've asked Congress to spend more money on education. But I've also asked that we expect more in return.
A good education system is one that's based on some fundamental principles. One is high expectations for every child. You all know, those of you involved with education know, if you lower the bar, if you have low expectations, you get those kind of results. If you assume certain children can't learn, certain children won't learn. So, inherent in any good reform system is one that sets high standards.
And finally, at the center of reform, something Rod and I worked hard on in Texas, is to measure, is to insist upon accountability. There's a lot of fear about accountability in the education system. People view it as a way to punish. That's not our vision. We view it as a way to correct.
And so this is an education program that's based upon principles. I firmly believe that when implemented, that when it's in place, that we'll begin to achieve the goal and dream that we all want, and that's an educated tomorrow.
It's a budget that has set priorities. One of the priorities is education. In the budget is the amount of money I've just spoken to.
Today I want to give you a little more detail about some of my top priorities, the education and health and character of American children. My budget spends additional money on these goals and spends it in effective, creative ways.
The values of our children must be a priority of our Nation. So my budget invests in abstinence education and drug treatment. We create a new $67 million program that will make grants to faithbased and community organizations who mentor the children of parents in prison.
This is a long list, but I wanted to make a point: My budget is active and compassionate. Discretionary spending grows by a healthy, responsible 4 percent, enough to meet our needs. We fund goals like education, health, and defense. We reduce debt at a record rate. We set aside a fund for future emergencies. We then have enough money to provide broad tax relief, including relief from the marriage penalty and a doubling of the child tax credit.
We will find—I will assure you this— we'll find areas where we can agree. I noticed Senator Carper dropped a strong charter school bill—and I was at Maurice's school earlier in the year. And Tom and I come from the Governors ranks; we worked a lot together; there's a lot of areas where we know we can work together to improve public education. And there's going to be some times we don't agree, but my pledge to the American people and the people of Delaware is, when we disagree, it will be done in a way that's respectful, where we can treat each other with respect, where we don't have to have this needless name-calling and finger-pointing to get ahead.
And then, of course, I was pleased to see that I got 100 percent support on one of my proposals from the Delaware delegate, and that is Mike Castle. And one thing I love about Mike is that he is a very thoughtful Member who stays focused. And his focus is education, amongst a lot of other things, but his main drive right now is to make sure we get the education bill right.
And the education bill that we're trying to get out of the House, and eventually the Senate, mirrors much of what you've done here in Delaware under the leadership of then-Governor Carper. And I see members of the legislature here as well. It really says, every child can learn; it's important to trust local people to run the schools; and we must have accountability to determine whether or not every child is learning. And if children are learning, we'll praise the teachers and principals and superintendents. But if not, instead of just moving children through the system as if they don't matter, we address the problems early, before it's too late.
The President. One of the things we've all got to do in our society is to encourage and herald the education entrepreneurs all across the country. And the idea of change and recognizing each student—an accountability system recognizing the talents and needs of each student is an incredible part of reform. And that's what the legislation we're working on in the Senate and the House is going to foster.
We were at a—I saw a computer—I'm sorry to get going here, but we saw a computer upstairs that was able to take a child, figure out its level of learning, and the program adjusts immediately to that child, and then another child gets on, the program adjusts to the learning capacities of that particular child. That's what education systems need to evolve toward, individualized learning, as opposed to lumping kids into groups and just kind of shuffling through the system.
The continued renewal of our cities requires five commitments: better education, broader homeownership, faster economic growth, easier environmental cleanup, and stronger communities and charities. All of these goals are reflected in the budget, which the Congress is now debating.
I've written a budget based upon my vision of an active and responsible Government. Now, I recognize Government has got important work to do; yet, active Government must also be focused and effective. Education is my top priority, and frankly, it ought to be your top priority, as well. After all, an industry which depends on the ability of people to read needs to be involved in education. Children who fail to master reading are going to be left behind in America, and we had better do something about it.
My budget reflects the commitment to education. It increases—it has an 11 percent increase in the Department of Education. We triple funding for reading programs. We have got a big focus on early childhood development.
We've prepared a budget with great care. I understand to budget is to choose, so I made choices. We identified priorities: education and health care, research, military pay, conservation, community and faith-based organizations. I gave those priorities the funding they needed, while keeping overall discretionary spending at a responsible rate of 4 percent growth. The result is a budget that keeps our national commitment to Social Security and Medicare, and increases the Federal budget by $100 billion from 2001 to 2002. A $100 billion increase in spending ought to be sufficient.
The Baldrige quality message is coming to health care and to education. Health care and education were added as categories in 1999. I realize there are no winners yet, but 25 organizations applied in '99 and 19 more in the year 2000. I look forward to presenting the first Baldrige Award in these categories soon.
When the House and Senate complete their work, they will have paved the way so the American people can receive an across-the-board income tax reduction, a doubling of the child credit, relief from the marriage penalty, and the elimination of the death tax. This budget also wisely increases spending on education, funds priorities like Medicare and Social Security, and pays down a record amount of debt.
At the Horatio Alger Association, you also understand how much the dream depends on education. And for that, all of us should be grateful. You promote literacy and early reading. You provide millions of dollars in scholarships based upon need and talent. You understand that the hope for a better life often begins in the classroom.
A good education can be the first real break a person gets in life. A young person might have big dreams for the future, but if he or she can't read, then the highest of hopes probably won't carry them very far.
The NAEP provides an important service. It shows us where the need is greatest amongst our students. And these results point out, once again, the need for a strong emphasis on early reading. The budget I submitted to Congress would accomplish this with a Reading First Program and reformed Title I programs. My budget gives the highest priority to education with an 11.5 percent increase in overall funding. It triples the current spending on reading and early detection of children facing reading difficulties.
I have sent Congress an education reform plan that offers greater Federal support to schools but requires higher standards and improved accountability, and I have sent Congress a tax plan that will accelerate our economic growth and leave more money with the people who earned it. Passing these two measures will be a long process that will require many votes in Congress. But the choices Congress makes will shape our country for decades. The tax plan I sent to Congress will help ensure that our children will grow up in a country bustling with opportunities. My education plan prepares our children to take advantage of those opportunities.
These are not routine votes. They are not ordinary business. They are decisions that we cannot afford to get wrong. Important reform is never easy, and it will always be tempting to postpone it. On education, there are some interest groups who don't like the idea of changes. On taxes, there are powerful institutions in Washington that would prefer to keep the people's money for themselves. But I'm committed to moving forward.
The old saying goes: The President proposes; Congress disposes; but in the end, the people rule. If we want higher educational standards, if we're to pass a substantial tax cut, the people must make their voices heard. Many of you have already telephoned your Members of Congress or sent letters and e-mails expressing your support for my education and tax plans, and I want to thank you for doing that. I hope you'll keep it up.
The crucial votes on education and taxes are still ahead, and many Members of Congress are still making up their minds. Don't just send them what you earn; tell them what you think. So I have a suggestion: During the recess, many Members of Congress will be holding townhall meetings, where constituents are welcome to come and express their views. You can find a list of these townhalls at www.bushtaxrelief.com. If your Congressman has a townhall scheduled, I hope you'll consider attending it. Maybe you might want to bring a relative or a friend.
I want to start the discussion by quoting Martin Luther King, Jr., who said this: "Intelligence is not enough. Intelligence plus character, that is the goal of true education." So we're here today to herald character-building programs. We're here today to recommend that throughout America we teach values to our children, that we not only teach our children how to read and write but that we be bold enough to teach them the difference between right and wrong, as well. And we've picked a pretty darn good school as an example.
By the way, I found this, that one of the keys to success in our public education is to have good, strong principals. So Annie, thank you for being here. I'm looking forward to hearing from you.
Parents have a tough battle in America today. Their children sometimes receive conflicting messages, and what public education ought to do is stand on the side of parents and be willing to reinforce the values that parents teach their children. And the Young Gentlemen's Club does just that. And so I'm looking forward to hearing the stories. I'm looking forward to hearing how best I can help.
One way we can help, by the way, is to have our budgets reflect our priorities. And the budget I submitted to the Congress triples the amount of character-education money available for public education. The budget I submitted to the Congress increases the amount of money available for abstinence education programs. And the money and program I've submitted to the Congress encourages after-school programs to be run by faith-based and communitybased programs that exist because they've heard the universal call to love a neighbor just like they'd like to be loved themselves.
And I want to thank you for your hard work, Madam Principal, and the results bear out what you just said. There is a connection between good character and good education. And we've got to remember that in this country. That's why it's important to spread character-education programs throughout America.
Before I talk about a subject dear to my heart, which is education, and before I recognize all the distinguished guests, I do want to say that right after my visit here, I am going to meet with the family of Petty Officer Third Class Steven Blocher. As you know, Steven is one of our 24 service men and women in China.
It's good to see Mike Ward again. I saw Mike just the other day. Thank you, Mike. And it's good to have members of the statehouse, the speaker and the leader of the Senate, on both sides of the aisle. It reminds me, seeing both Republicans and Democrats from the statehouse here, that when it comes to education, there really isn't—there isn't a need for partisan bickering. When it comes to the education of the children, it is right for people of both parties to come together and figure out how to get the job done. And that's what's happened here.
I know that's what's happened here in North Carolina. It also happened in the State of Texas when I was the Governor— that we said we'll have our time for political bickering, but when it comes to important issues like education, we'll set aside political bickering and focus on the children. And as a result of people from both parties being able to work together in our respective States, North Carolina and Texas have made great progress.
I know that some other States don't like to hear this, but at one point in time, the National Education Goals Panel analyzed which of the States in the United States were making the greatest gains on student achievement. And it turned out our States were, North Carolina and Texas. And I attribute that to the fact that people from both political parties were willing to work together—something Washington, DC, needs more of, by the way. We need less name-calling and finger-pointing and more focus on what's right for America. And a good place to start is when it comes to the education of our children.
One of the things I look forward to working with the Congress on is to explain to those who don't quite understand that all knowledge doesn't exist in Washington; that in order to have excellence in our schools, we've got to trust local people. And I mean we need to pass power out of Washington, DC, to empower the Governors and local school boards to make the right decisions for the children in their respective States, because one size does not fit all when it comes to the education of the American children.
And finally, the cornerstone of reform for North Carolina and for Texas and for other States is the willingness of our States to measure, is to say accountability is an incredibly important part of educational excellence. Now, in your State of North Carolina, you measure three through eight. In my State of Texas, we do the same thing. And that's exactly the cornerstone of reform necessary. Do you know why? Because if you do not measure, you do not know whether or not children are learning. And if you don't know, it's likely certain children will be moved just right through the system.
In the budget I submitted to the Congress, one which one body of the House listened to pretty carefully, and—one body of the Congress listened to carefully, and the other decided, well, they're going to listen to some of it, but they decided to increase the size and scope of the Federal Government—we put a lot of money in for public education. The biggest increase of any Department was for public education.
Secondly, it's one thing to teach a child to read and write, but in order to make sure education is full and complete, we also must teach our children right from wrong. We triple the amount of money in the budget for character education programs. We should not be afraid to teach children what's right and what's wrong. And we should not be afraid in our society to teach children the values which have stood the test of time: Don't lie, cheat, and steal; honor thy parents; show respect; be responsible for the decisions you make in life. And I also believe that, along those lines, we ought not to be afraid to teach abstinence to our children. So I've increased abstinence funding in the budget, as well.
As you know, particularly in your State, there's more than just spending money to education. It is important to get it right. And that's why I urge the Congress to hear the message of accountability and local control.
You see, it is incredibly important for this country to change our mentality about education. Instead of asking the question, "How old are you," we need to start asking the question, "What do you know?" Instead of saying, "Oh, you're 10, and you go here; and you're 12, you go here; or you're 16, we'll just put you here"—it's time for this country, all across the land, to start asking the question, "What do you know?" And if you don't know what you're supposed to know, we'll make sure you do early, before it's too late.
We're making progress. Oh, some folks are kicking and screaming, but we're making some progress toward remembering whose money it is. But we're making good progress on education, as well, and I'm grateful. I'm grateful when a President Bush can sit down with a Senator Kennedy and have a meaningful, real dialog on what's right for the country. I'm grateful for that.
I want this country to be a results-oriented country, starting at the national level. We ought to be focusing on results—particularly when it comes to education of children. And if they're good, let's praise everybody. And if they're bad, let's praise them, but let's fix it. So we're making progress in the Nation's Capital.
I want to describe to you the budget I laid out, just to put your mind at ease. We increase discretionary spending in the budget—that means programs other than entitlement programs—by 4 percent. Many of you work hard to get along, and you haven't had a 4 percent pay raise lately. Inflation is lower than 4 percent. So I thought it would be reasonable to ask the Federal Government to live on a 4 percent increase in the discretionary spending account. Four percent increase in discretionary spending increases Federal assistance to North Carolina education programs to more than $947 million a year.
Now, I want you all to understand where the tradeoffs come when it comes to budgeting. The money either ends up in Federal programs, or it ends up in the people's pocket. And my point of view I make in Washington and that I want you to help me on is, we can meet priorities. We can fund education and good conservation programs. We can fulfill our commitment to the elderly. We can make Social Security is safe and secure today and around tomorrow for the younger folks. We can do all that by growing the discretionary account at 4 percent and still have meaningful tax reductions.
Thank you very much. Please, be seated. Well, Reverend Flake, thank you very much. It's an honor to be with you again. This city really misses Floyd Flake. But Jamaica, Queens, is better off for him being there. [Laughter] He's a visionary. He understands a different kind of power than politics. And the community in which he is associated is better off, and I'm honored he's here. And I want to thank all the leaders who are here, as well, and I want to thank you all for coming. I really appreciate the contributions toward educational excellence that the folks on this stage are making and that you all are making all across the country. It's an honor to have you at the White House.
America's schools are increasingly separate and unequal, and that is unacceptable in our great land. We must do more than tinker around the edges. We must all come together and fight for real reform and real change. Effective education reform requires both pressure from above and competition from below. We must challenge schools with higher standards and arm parents with better options.
One of the greatest benefits of testing is the information it gives to parents. Given that information, more parents will be involved, becoming participants, not spectators, in the education of their children. Armed with that information, parents will have leverage to force reform.
First, I'm an enthusiastic supporter of charter schools. Charter schools are beginning to change our understanding of public education, no question about it. These schools are public, because they're publicly funded and publicly accountable for results. The vision of parents and teachers and principals determines the rest. And the competition charter schools oftentimes provide can serve as an agent to strengthen other schools. You see, you hear a lot of talk about, well, we can't have charter schools or choice because some school is going to be left behind. That's got it backwards. [Laughter] Excellence in neighborhoods means excellence in another neighborhood. It means raising the bar.
Secondly, the education proposal I submitted to Congress gives alternatives for students trapped in persistently dangerous schools. States must report to parents whether or not the schools are safe. And if safety does not improve, students must get the option of attending another public school.
I vigorously campaigned on this idea because I think it is right. And it's an idea that I remain strongly committed to. I don't believe the Federal Government should fund persistent failure. I think there's a role for Federal Government in funding education, but we need to do better than we've done in the past. We need to encourage accountability. And when we find success, we need to thank the teachers and principals. When we find failure, we must give parents different options—different options.
We've also submitted a plan to increase education savings accounts, to expand them from $500 to $5,000 a year. And parents will be able to use these funds for any educated-related expense, from kindergarten to college and beyond.
The goal of these reforms is to ensure that every child in every school receives a quality education. That's the goal. And it's time we moved beyond the old arguments and old divides to make sure that we fulfill our duty that no child in America is left behind. It is time to set aside the old partisan bickering and finger-pointing and name-calling that comes from freeing parents to make different choices for their children. We can do better in America— we can do better.
I believe we can get positive results out of the Congress. I believe we can make progress toward reforming a system that is working in some places and not working in others. I know we can have quality education for every child. And when we do, this great land of ours—by the way, the greatest Nation on the face of the Earth— will be even greater. We'll be even greater.
Thomas Jefferson still inspires us. He believed that education was the key to human potential. We must be committed to educating every single child in America. His Louisiana Purchase threw open the opportunities of this vast country, and we must dedicate ourselves to extending opportunity wider and wider. Above all, Jefferson believed in liberty, in the ability of citizens to govern their own country and govern their own lives. We must always affirm this democratic faith.
We must extend the benefits of education in this hemisphere. Both development and democracy in the long term depend on education. We must build the skills and reward the hopes of all our people.
Now, there's a myth in Washington that says you can't have meaningful, real tax relief. But those are the folks that want to increase the size and scope of the Federal Government. And it really is a matter of who you trust. And I'd rather have the American people spending the money than the Federal Government. Once we meet priorities, I trust the people with their own money. I trust the people of central Connecticut to make the right decisions for their families. I want more people to have more money in their pockets so they can save for their children's education or so they can build for their future.
I mentioned a while ago that one of my priorities in the budget is education. The Department that gets the biggest increase of any Department in our budget is the Department of Education. It's important to spend money on education. I recognize that, and we do. And I'll talk about some of the spending initiatives that we set out. But I also want to remind you, money alone isn't going to solve our problems. And we have some problems.
Secondly, we must trust local people to chart the path for excellence for the children of America. We must trust the Governors and local school board members and principals in schools. We must empower people at the local level, because one size does not fit all when it comes to the education of the children in America.
And we're making progress on this issue, like we're making progress on the budget. The Members will be coming back from their Easter breaks and will be taking up the education reforms. I appreciate, for example, the work of Senator Joe Lieberman. Oh, I know that may surprise some in Connecticut or elsewhere in America to hear me say something nice about a man that tried to prevent me from becoming the President. [Laughter] But nevertheless, like me, he's put aside the election, and he's focusing on what's right for America, and he's helping bring forth an education plan that embodies the principles that I just described. And I appreciate his hard work and his support on this measure. And we've agreed on some core principles.
We haven't agreed 100 percent all across the board, but we're making good progress. For example, we've agreed on a major consolidation of Federal education programs that will give States more flexibility and more freedom. In other words, to put it this way, instead of having Federal money with all kinds of strings attached to it, we're having Federal spending, Federal money, but trusting the local folks to spend that money that meets the needs of each respective State.
Now because of two great principals, both of whom I met—and by the way, it's also—it should be clear to everybody, I hope, in America that a good principal, a great principal will make a huge difference in the education of the children. Paul and Lauren, they use the tests to refocus the curriculum and the teaching methodology of that school. In other words, they use the test for what it's designed to be for, and that is, as a way to correct problems. Tests should not be viewed as a way to punish people; tests need to be viewed as a way to correct problems. And they did so. And they intensified the students' reading programs and writing programs.
In other words, the entrepreneurs, the educational entrepreneurs took hold of the situation. They used the information systems to say, "Something's not right. Now, let's do something about it." And they have. And B.W. Tinker students are better off for it, and I'm glad I went to see that school.
And I aim to do something about math, as well. I've been spending a lot of time talking about reading, but in my budget I want to point up a couple of programs that I think make sense: $200 million for States to develop math and science partnership programs with local education districts, as well as higher education institutions— an opportunity to be able to combine the two.
And one other aspect of the education program I want to share with you is, also, we triple the amount of money for character education in our classrooms. Education is not complete unless we're willing to teach our children not only how to read and write but the difference between right and wrong. We ought not to fear to teach our children good, old-fashioned values that have stood the test of time: Don't lie, cheat, or steal; respect others; respect their opinions.
Progress requires a commitment to tearing down the barriers of poverty, disease, and ignorance so that every individual in our hemisphere may realize his or her full potential. The United States wants to work together with our neighbors to find ways to give all our children quality education, because learning and literacy are the foundations for democracy and for development.
The President. Well, not really. They were more interested in, one, our commitment to the neighborhood. Secondly, they were—we spent a lot of time talking about drugs and drug trafficking, and I assured them I understood that our Nation must do a better job of reducing demand and, at the same time, working with the Andean nations to eradicate supply. An issue that came up, and one that I was aware of, is that Plan Colombia could have the opportunity to spread the problems to neighboring countries outside of Colombia. And therefore, we have to put together an Andean initiative which recognizes that and, thirdly, that relations are—that we must have relations beyond just drug eradication. In other words, that we've got to work together to make sure the education systems in our respective countries fulfill their promise, that legal reforms are needed in some parts of the world.
I want to assure the leaders that Plan Colombia means more than just the country of Colombia—I know that's of concern to the President of Ecuador—that we've got plans for all the countries in the region. And it's not just on helping to fight drugs. It's on making sure that the economies remain strong, that the infrastructure for education is in place. It is in our nations' interests that we cooperate together.
We're committed to making education a centerpiece of our economic agenda because learning and literacy are the foundations for development and democracy. The United States will sponsor the creation of Hemispheric Centers for Teacher Excellence. These centers will provide teacher training for improving literacy and basic education, both in person and over the Internet.
But when I return to Washington tomorrow, the most pressing business concern: some long overdue reforms here in our own country. Early next week my plan to reform our public schools is expected to come up for debate in the Senate. It is the best chance we have had for meaningful education reform in a generation, and we must not waste it.
There is a lot going on in Washington and the world—a summit, a tax relief debate, major education reform. But few things are as important as giving all our children the tools of learning. I hope you will support my education reform plan. And I hope you encourage your Senators to do the same.
I've been most impressed by the discussions we've had. It's clear to me that ours is a hemisphere united by freedom. It's a partnership that will help us tackle the big challenges that we all face: the education of our children, HIV/AIDS, protecting our environment. It's a strong partnership. It's a partnership that will help us all achieve what we want—is that everybody in our respective countries are able to succeed and realize their dreams.
What makes the story interesting is that students of his generation were segregated by race. No more in this great land called America. The Rod Paige Middle School will know loud and clear that education breaks down any barrier to success. Mr. Secretary, you're a role model for students across America and for a couple of adults, as well.
"A teacher affects eternity," Henry Adams once wrote. He meant that their influence is unending. Teachers play a vital role in the intellectual and moral education of children. They teach children how to read and write, and they teach children right from wrong. They teach students to love knowledge and to disdain ignorance. Teachers inspire students, fire imaginations, nurture their natural abilities, and encourage them to explore the possibilities of life.
Michele Forman knows her subjects and has high expectations for her students. She believes there must be a mutual trust between teachers and students. She's highly regarded by her colleagues. She's a woman of boundless energy and enthusiasm. In all these ways, she is an example of excellence in education.
This week the United States Senate will begin debate on what's known as S-1, appropriately named because it is my number one priority, it is your number priority, and it's an education reform proposal. This is not just about another legislative debate. It's the best opportunity in a generation for having meaningful education reform come out of Washington, DC.
We'll increase spending on education and focus that new spending on reforming schools that aren't performing well or on a powerful reading initiative.
I support historic new levels of education funding. Yet all of us know better schools require more than just funding. And I hope the Senate hears that we need meaningful education reform by high standards, accountability. My education reform has a good balance of new dollars.
I wish I knew the law that I could sign that would say we would love each other like we'd like to be loved ourself. There's no such law. But there are some laws we can pass to help people with their lives. And that's exactly the kind of budget I submitted to the United States Congress. It's a Congress that's focused and principled. It's a budget that says we could spend more money on the public's education system around America. It's a budget that prioritizes education.
And the budget is focused. We increase a Federal education funding from 366 million to 390 million. We increase Head Start funding from $57.4 to $58.5 million. There's an estimated 379 million targeted for highway funding in Arkansas. This is a responsible budget that leaves room for tax relief, but also focuses on issues that matter to the folks of Arkansas. And coming down on the airplane, he and I spent a lot of time talking about agriculture.
We tripled character education funds. It's one thing to teach children to read and write, but we also have to teach them right from wrong in America. And so we make money available for local school districts for character education.
No, we set priorities in the budget. And I appreciate Senator Hutchinson's leadership on the Labor and Education Committee in the Senate. He talked about a bipartisan consensus, and we're getting there, because the principles inherent in the bill are sound and make sense. It's a commonsense approach to education.
Up until now, much of public education has asked the question to our children, "How old are you? If you're 10, you're supposed to go here, and if you're 12, you belong here, and if you're 16, you go here." And guess what happens in a system that simply asks age as opposed to, "What do you know?" Children get shuffled through the system. And many times, sadly enough, they're inner-city kids. It's so much easier to quit on a child than to take the extra time to teach them.
The system must stop asking the question, "How old are you?" and start asking the question, "What do you know?" And if the children do not know what they're supposed to know early in life, we need to correct those problems, because there are no second-rate children in America as far as this administration is concerned. There are no second-rate dreams. And the education reform package we're sending sets this clear and profound goal: Not one single child will be left behind in the great country called America.
And by the way, as this campaign gets going, you might turn to a friend or neighbor and say, "It makes a lot of sense for Arkansas to have somebody who can walk into the Oval Office. It makes a lot of sense for our State, with the problems we have, to have a United States Senator be able to pick the phone up and say, ‘Mr. President, I'd like to discuss the concerns of the people of Arkansas. We've got some problems with our farmers; I'd like to discuss the concerns. We may have a problem in our education system; Mr. President, I'd like you to hear me out. I'd like to deliver a message on the people of Arkansas."' And I can assure you, folks, that the person running this race who will have the ear of the President of the United States is Senator Tim Hutchinson.
And I'm proud that Laura has her own commitment to education. She was a teacher when I met her. In her own way, she will always be a teacher. She's the best kind of teacher, too, the kind who leaves no one out and believes in the possibilities of every person.
We know how it turned out. We know there was a record of shared accomplishment and a record of shared credit, as well. Yet, it all could have worked out differently. It could have been much different. Had he chosen to, Bob—and for that matter, Pete Laney—could have prevented tax reform or legal reform or education reform. In the Constitution, I could stop legislation with a veto. In the capital, Bob Bullock could stop it with a phone call.
The Senate committee responsible for education voted 20 to nothing in favor of a solid education reform bill. And we'll see results, too, from our initiative to welcoming charities and faith-based organizations into the work of helping Americans in need. We're at work on a plan to increase America's energy supply in the long term. At the same time, we are acting in a commonsense way to defend our environment. We are adopting new, scientifically sensible rules to discourage emissions of lead, to protect wetlands, to reduce the amount of arsenic in drinking water, to curb dangerous pesticides, and to clean the air of pollution from onroad diesel engines.
But it's just as important for us to listen as it is to speak. A week ago, I attended the Summit of the Americas in Quebec City, where I met with the democratically elected leaders of Canada, Mexico, Central and South America, and the Caribbean. We talked about how we can handle common challenges, everything from education and the environment to drugs, energy, and trade. I said my piece, and I listened, as well. That's how good neighbors behave.
In the United States, I'm happy to say, we're putting old fears and quarrels behind us. We know that we must protect the integrity of our border, yet we understand how that border can be viewed from the other side as the gateway to better wages and a better life. I've often said that family values don't stop at the Rio Grande. The best way to have a stable border is better opportunity in both our nations, opportunity built by trade and education and freedom.
Again, it also recognizes that the most effective policy really does start at the local level. The most local of all levels, by the way, is in somebody's home, where a mom or dad works with the children to help them make the right decisions, or in schools, where schools are willing to teach character education, willing to not only teach a child to read and write but also the difference between right and wrong. It comes when role models stand up and clearly say, "Drugs will destroy your life. Don't use drugs."
Fortunately, today, we know more about what works in prevention and education, treatment and law enforcement. We will put this knowledge to use. But above all, our efforts rest on an unwavering commitment to stop drug use. Acceptance of drug use is simply not an option for this administration.
Illegal drugs impose a staggering cost of more than $100 billion every year, principally from lost productivity. Yet this dollar figure does not capture the human tragedy of drug use: lost lives, educational and job opportunities unmet, families torn apart, health care costs, school dropout rates, and more. Drug use harms people of every economic class, but drug use is doing the most damage to the poor.
A successful antidrug effort depends on a thoughtful and integrated approach. Mr. Walters understands this as well as anybody in America. During his career, he's worked to improve the effectiveness of drug education and prevention programs. He played a key role in ensuring a record commitment of resources to drug treatment and research in a previous administration. He helped ensure that the Federal Government did its part in source countries, on our borders, and on our streets.
Thirty-five sub-Saharan African nations are eligible under AGOA for their commitment to these principles. The principles in the African Growth and Opportunity Act are important for Africa, but they're also important for the United States. Countries that respect markets and the rights of the individual are more likely to grow economically. They are more likely to achieve political stability. They can raise education standards, deliver better health care, and protect their environment. Strong African democracies with strong economies and healthy populations will contribute to a world that is more peaceful and more prosperous for all.
Secondly, I said, give us a chance—and we had put together a group of Congressmen and Senators to pass meaningful, real reform of our education system, one that would empower local folks, to give more power at the local level because we recognize one size does not fit all when it comes to the education of the children, but also one that says, if you receive Federal money, show us whether or not children are learning to read and write and add and subtract, because we want to know. We want to know whether or not the very faces of our future are learning, and if they're not— if they're not, we won't sit idly by in America. When we find youngsters who can't read, we'll correct the problems early, before it's too late, because our motto is, "Not one single child will be left behind in America."
That's how I've come to feel about the Yale experience, grateful. I studied hard, I played hard, and I made a lot of lifelong friends. What stays with you from college is the part of your education you hardly ever notice at the time. It's the expectations and examples around you, the ideals you believe in, and the friends you make.
It also starts with making sure our public schools educate children. I would bet—I haven't seen any studies on this, but I would fully suspect that if a child is illiterate, relative to his or her classmates, it diminishes hope. And the dream that we all hope for, higher education, becomes smaller in the eyes of that child. If a person doesn't have the capacity that we all want that person to have, I suspect hope is in the far-distant future, if at all.
And so first things first means having an education system that provides hope by educating children, not a system that looks at hard-to-educate children, perhaps the nin˜ os of the first generation whose parents may not speak English, and say, "Oh, it's the easiest route to take, is just move them through the school system. The easiest thing for us to do is not to focus on each child but just move them through. If they're 12, we'll put everybody here. If they're 16, everybody goes there. And if they happen to learn to read, fine." That attitude is going to change. It's going to change by starting to ask the question around this country, what do you know? Do you know what you're supposed to know? And if you don't know what you're supposed to know, we as a society will come together to make sure you do early, before it's too late.
What Margaret will discuss with you is the bill that we've proposed here in Congress that lays out some clear principles about public education. One is, we ought to expect high standards. That means when people stand in front of a classroom full of Latino children, they expect the best. They know what all of us know, particularly Sara knows, that if you expect the best, you get good results. If you say, "Well, certain kids can't learn; it's too hard to teach them to speak English"—if you lower the bar, we get lousy results. And every child deserves better than that.
Now, we've got a couple of more initiatives that I think you'll find interesting. One is, I believe Head Start ought to be an early reading program, as well as the current strategy. And I think we ought to focus on making sure children are armed with the tools necessary to become good little readers. Unfortunately, not enough parents, or some parents, don't read to their kids. And so the schoolchildren are behind. Well, if we're going to have an accountability system starting in the third grade, we need to make sure we've got enough early education to get those children up to the starting line with every other child. And so the budget I submitted outlines triple the amount of money available for reading programs. Inherent in the program is K-through-2 diagnostic testing, so that we know if little children have got reading deficiencies, we'll correct them. The whole core of reform is—I ask the question, do our children know what they're supposed to know?
In our budget, we also focus on ways to complement the work that you all do. We expand the monies available for Hispanic-serving institutions. And as importantly, I think you'll find that—this fact will, I think, bring some joy to your heart— that we expand the Pell grants available for low-income and middle-income students. Expanding the Pell grants is not a way to replace what you all are doing; it's a way to complement what you're doing. We want the—I can't say it enough—we want the American experience to be available for every child. And Pell grants is a good way to encourage access to higher education.
We expand the TRIO program in my budget. It's a program aimed at focusing on keeping children in school. We believe in education savings accounts. We give parents a tax incentive to save. And as I mentioned before, we're focused on making sure that the public schools do their job.
On the one hand, we'll educate. On the other hand, we must inspire. And governments aren't very good at inspiring. We're kind of bureaucracies. The way to inspire a child is to convince somebody to be a mentor. The way to inspire somebody about America and its future and hope is for somebody to put an arm around a child and say, "I love you a lot. And America is meant for you, as well as anybody else." So we're talking about education today, but there's a different kind of education that our society must do, as well, and that's the education of helping somebody feel wanted.
And we're making great progress on education, as well. Just yesterday in the House of Representatives, Republicans and Democrats overwhelmingly agreed that we should insist upon local control of schools, strong accountability, and greater options for parents when their children are trapped in failing schools. The Senate now takes up the education bill, and I'm confident we'll enact a plan to improve all of America's public schools so that no child is left behind. As well, as I mentioned, I'm working hard with both Republicans and Democrats to put in place a Faith-Based Initiative that I truly believe will change America for the better.
We acted on principle. We worked together to build consensus and to get results. This is significant, and this is only the beginning. The Peterson family and families like them all across America need more than just a tax cut. The Petersons want us to work together to improve public education, strengthen their retirement security, modernize Medicare, and strengthen and modernize our national defenses.
Three years ago, there was a lot of talk about education reform in our Nation's Capital, and frankly, there wasn't much action. So I acted. I called for and the Congress passed the No Child Left Behind Act. With a solid bipartisan majority, we delivered the most dramatic education reforms in a generation. We've increased funding, particularly for the poor. But in return for access funding, we're finally asking the question of school districts all across America, "Are you teaching our children how to read and write and add and subtract?" This administration is challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We believe every child can learn, and we expect every child—every school to teach so that not one single child is left behind in America.
If you are fortunate enough to be a mother or father, you're responsible for loving your child with all your heart. If you're concerned about the quality of the education in the community in which you live, you're responsible for doing something about it. If you're a CEO in corporate America, you're responsible for telling the truth to your shareholders and your employees. And in this new responsibility society, each of us is responsible for loving our neighbor just like we'd like to be loved ourself.
You're wondering why I'm on stage with some local citizens, important Washington, DC-type personalities—[laughter]—it's because we're going to talk about something really important that's happening in the country, and that is, we're going to talk about how to make sure our seniors get the best health care possible. That's what we're here to talk about. We've got some— this is going to be a very interesting discussion, one that I think you'll find to be educational, one that will help illuminate what's going on with a good piece of law in a practical way.
Today when I landed, I met a lady named Ruth Blake. Where are you, Ruth? Yes, there she is. Ruth, thank you for coming. You're probably wondering why I'm introducing Ruth. The reason why is she's from Shepherd's Center, which is a—[applause]—sounds like you brought your family. [Laughter] Ruth is a volunteer. She manages the adult education program that educates and empowers seniors. And the reason I bring that up is I just want our fellow citizens here in Liberty, Missouri, to understand that I know the great strength of the country is the heart and souls of the American people, that our greatest strength—[applause].
Now, let me ask you something. One of the interesting things about education— I didn't see you all over there; that's the end zone. Okay, never mind.
One of the interesting things about education is that as you increase your skill level, you increase your productivity. It means you're a more productive worker. And when you become more productive, you make more money. One of the interesting things about a changing economy is that our workers are more productive than ever before. That means instead of using a hoe, you use a backhoe. Or instead of using, you know, a regular old standard typewriter, you use a computer. In other words, that's an example of becoming more productive.
For example, in Wisconsin and Indiana, more than 270 community leaders are coming together to find ways to get information to rural seniors. In Chicago, a food pantry, the Catholic Archdiocese, and a news publication are all working to get the word out about the new Medicare benefits. The Federal Department of Transportation, under the leadership of Norm Mineta, is working with local agencies to post Medicare information in buses and at highway rest stops. Thousands of pharmacies are working with Medicare to provide information for seniors. Countless other organizations are holding community events and connecting with seniors face to face, so Medicare recipients can get their questions answered and make informed choices about prescription drug coverage. In other words, we're on a massive education effort, starting today. And I'm asking for America's help.
I've come to Minnesota to begin an education process, starting—right now the forms are going out, by the way, to help people qualify for this prescription drug benefit. Now, all people qualify for it, but if you happen to be low-income, you get 95 percent or more of the prescription drugs paid for by the Government. Starting October 1st, information about all the variety of plans will go out. People will then be allowed to start signing up for the new Medicare plan starting November the 15th. January 1st, the benefit kicks in. And you have until May 15th to sign up so you can get the good deal on the prescription drug plans.
Ms. Orluck. What I do here at the community center is I'm in charge of developing the senior programs that happen around here. So it may be a fitness class. It may be a social recreation program, a trip. It may be an educational class, like a computer class, or a great decisions discussion group, or it's a wellness and health program, where we bring people in to educate them about various topics on wellness and health, and Medicare is one of those topics that we cover.
Ms. Orluck. That's correct. We're currently working with the local Social Security Administration to provide education and also opportunities to register, so they'll be able to meet one on one with individuals and just come in as a group and hear about the changes and how it affects them and their——
And if you want to help, become a Dorothy and explain to these people. First of all, you know, the main line of education— or the frontline of education is going to be sons and daughters. Do your duty. Help your mom and dad. That's what you're supposed to do. They helped you. Now you help them. And I think you're going to find you will have done a good service.
I want to thank the Atlanta Chamber for sponsoring this event. I think it's a good use for the Chamber's time to let us come. I say "us" because there's going to be more than one speaker—you'll be happy to hear—to talk about things that are important for our senior citizens. This is an educational experience for people. And I can't thank you enough for sponsoring this. So to all the Chamber folks, Tom Bell and Sam Williams and the members of the Chamber, thanks a lot for letting us come by.
I want to thank very much Jim Wagner, the president at Emory. We have just come from a Medicare education seminar at— on the campus of that fantastic university. It is a special place. Thanks for letting us come by. I appreciate you very much for letting us—for coming today as well.
These folks believe in a dark vision of the world where there's no such thing as dissent or religious liberty. All you got to do is think about the Taliban in Afghanistan, where if you spoke your mind, you were whipped in the public square, and young girls weren't given an education. That's what they think, and they have designs. They have goals. They want to topple governments. They want us to retreat from the world so they can spread their ideology of hate.
I got my man Mark McClellan here. His job is to make sure that seniors get the information necessary to meet the timetable. Part of making sure seniors have got the information necessary to meet the timetable is, Mother and I have come—this is educational. We're trying to get on the TV screens so people understand there's something new coming in Medicare. And we're stimulating a grassroots effort. We're going to hear from two good folks who are involved with spreading the word to our seniors.
What we're talking about today is new programs and plans with prescription drugs becoming available for our seniors. This is as much an education exercise as anything else, because I fully understand and our Government fully understands, many seniors don't want to change. They're not interested in change. And therefore, what I'm telling you is, is that, at least listen to what's available. You don't have to change if you don't want to, but at least be open-minded enough to listen. And our panelists today are going to represent different constituencies that will help seniors understand what's available.
Ms. Bryan. Well, we actually have a continuing education system for all the pharmacists.
The President. Mark has been on the road with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and others on a grassroots campaign, because we understood when this started coming out that we needed to do a lot of education. Again, I repeat: Some folks simply don't want any change, and I understand that completely. But I urge you to take a look, and you'll find more options available. You see, the more options that are available, the more likely there's going to get—you're going to get what you want. And if you're a low-income senior, you've got to take advantage of the Government program. It is a good deal.
THE PRESIDENT: Beginning to think it through a little bit. The first--the touchstone is going to be a Bush library or complex or where it's going to be. It's going to be in Texas. I don't know exactly where yet. We are beginning the process of listening to some of these institutes of higher education and their ideas. I would like to leave behind a legacy or a think-tank, a place for people to talk about freedom and liberty, and the de Tocqueville model--what de Tocqueville saw in America. I would like for there to be a place where young scholars to come and write and think and articulate and opine and teach, but I really haven't beyond that. Of course, it's a nice place to go to, which is the ranch.
Finally, in order to remain competitive, we've got to have kids who understand math and science. And so I laid out an initiative—[applause]—I spent some time talking about it last week. I'm going to continue talking about it. I'm looking forward to working with—this is an issue, by the way, where we can put aside needless politics, which tends to dominate Washington, DC, and focus on the good for the future of this country. I'm confident we can get something done on this very important education as well as research and technology issue.
The President. Thank you all. Thanks for coming. Please be seated. Thank you. Cindy, thanks for the kind introduction. I want to thank the chamber for inviting me here, to what I think you'll find to be an interesting educational event; at least I hope so. As you can see, I mean, there's several ways to have an educational event. One is to put a podium out there and let me blow away for an hour, kind of talk and talk and talk. Another way is to have fellow citizens sit up here and discuss important policy issues. And that's what we're here to do today. We're here to discuss health care, particularly for our seniors. And so I want to thank you all for joining me.
The President. Thanks for coming. I first want to thank Bob Templin, who is the president of Northern Virginia Community College, for hosting us again. This is a place of educational excellence, and what you're about to watch is a seminar on the new Medicare benefit. And the reason why we've got to conduct seminars on education about what's available is because there is a lot of people who haven't signed up yet for the Medicare benefit, and we want people to pay attention to what's available.
And our education system must make sure we set high standards and measure and make sure that we're just not passing kids through the schools that can't read and write. And I'm calling on Congress to encourage school districts to have a special emphasis on math and science. We want our children to be educated so they can lead the world. We want them educated with the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century.
So step one is education. Step two is to make sure we're always the leader in innovation and research and development. And the way to do that is to spend Federal money, which we're going to do, in the basic sciences, as well as make sure the research and development tax credit which encourages the private sector to invest in research and technology, make sure that's a permanent part of the Tax Code. In other words, make sure America is the leader in innovation. If we're not the leader in innovation, other countries will be the leader of innovation. So there's competition. We can try to wall ourselves off, but it will still be a competitive world.
I'm here to talk about Medicare. We've got an exciting program and an exciting opportunity for people to improve their lives. So this is an educational forum. This is a chance not only to speak to the folks here but to those who may be watching on TV about a really interesting opportunity for the seniors all around our country to really improve their lives by signing up for a new opportunity in Medicare.
The President. One of the things he said that's interesting is—CVS took corporate responsibility and said, we now under-stand—once President George W. signed the bill, we understand that a lot of our customers are now going to be wondering whether or not it makes sense for them to look at it. And the company became a part of the educational outreach by educating first the educators, who happened to be the pharmacists; that's what you're saying.
The President. It's my honor to welcome the next Governor of Virginia to the Oval Office. This man is going to win because he knows a couple of truths: One, that it's important to let people keep their own money—I appreciate your strong stance on holding the line on cutting the car tax in Virginia—and secondly, he has prioritized education, and he knows full well that if you have a Governor who knows how to lead, you can set clear spending priorities. And so I believe Mark has got the right issues, the right vision, and the right skill to be a great Governor for Virginia.
The President. I think we've had a pretty good 6 months, when you think about it. I've signed a lot of legislation. Today, for example, I signed the legislation naming the education savings accounts after Paul Coverdell. That's a piece of legislation that had languished in the past; it's now law.
The President. No, I think if—the Mid-Session Review showed that the budgets we submitted not only are in balance but meet the priorities that I think are important, including defense and education.
And we hear a lot of dialog on the Hill about the importance of national defense. If that's the case, give us a number—at the beginning of the process, not at the end of the process. Let us know what the defense—I think it's realistic to ask Congress to prioritize national defense and education. We've done so. The budget that Mitch Daniels outlined clearly shows that we've got the monies available for a good, strong national defense.
Members of both parties are saying, well, we need to spend more, this, that, and the other. And that's good. What I hope they do is, they decide that the budget I submitted or the request I submitted for '02 is the right number and that they let us know that that's the number they will fund early, so that we avoid a fight, because I will fight for education funding and a national defense funding that I think is at the appropriate level. But fight isn't the right word yet.
The President. No, she was branched out from day one, as you—David, I'm surprised you didn't know that we made her—from the minute I got sworn in, she was the head of domestic policy, which means on every issue that has been in the domestic scene, she has been very much involved, whether it be Medicare reform or—she's doing a great job. Margaret is a very smart woman. You bet, she was an education person in Texas. But I realized how brilliant a woman she is, and she can handle just about every task we give her. So she's doing a good job. I've got a good team.
A couple of points I want to make: One, I appreciate so very much the web site being available in more than just one language. There are a lot of Spanish-speaking folks in America, and they'll be able to access the web site. And that's important because I want all Americans to understand that our priorities coming into the fall will be our economy, education, opportunity, and security. And concerned citizens can read about those four categories, those four priorities of the administration, across the web page.
As I said, education, the economy, opportunity, and security will be our priorities. And one of the things that I hope Congress does is work and act quickly on the education bill and get it to my desk as soon as they get back. It's an important piece of legislation. The House has passed a version; the Senate has passed a version. And I know that the leadership has had their teams working to resolve differences over the last couple of weeks. And I'm confident that if the will is there, they can get a bill to me quickly. I look forward to signing one.
We have been working hard to fulfill another promise, and that's the promise of making sure every child in America gets a good education. A domestic priority of mine is to make sure every child—I mean every child—learns to read. I fully understand a literate child is one more likely to be able to learn. And yet, we've got to admit there's too many children that can't read in America.
Now, lest you think I forgot where I came from, inherent in the education bill that I proposed is this solid principle: I trust local people to run their schools. I would rather the people of Green Bay, Wisconsin, make the decisions on the public education than people in Washington, DC. So we passed legislation that has bills—has power coming out of Washington to empower local people to run the schools.
But inherent also in the education bill, as passed the House and passed the Senate—not only says we're going to spend more money, we're going to spend it more wisely. And in return for more money, we're going to ask the question, can our children read and write and add and subtract? We expect there to be accountability because by measuring, we will know. By measuring, we will make sure we correct problems early, before it's too late. By measuring, we will make sure that no child gets simply shuffled through the system.
And so we've got a plan that makes sense. And I call upon the House, and I call upon the Senate conferees to get together and get that education bill on my desk so I can sign it, so that public education fulfills its hope and promise for every child in America.
And I call upon the appropriators in Washington, DC, to let the country know the level of defense appropriations and the level of education appropriations early in the process, rather than late. These are national priorities, and they ought to be priorities of our appropriators in the Halls of Congress as well.
One is to make sure we get an education bill on my desk quickly. Many children are starting school today. Some have started prior to Labor Day. We need to get a bill. And Senator Lott worked with me very closely, and we got a good bill out of the Senate. I'm confident that the conferees can reconcile their differences and get a bill to my desk quickly.
And secondly, we're going to talk about the budget. There's been a lot of noise about the budget. I hope the budget—the appropriations process discards the old-style politics of trying to scare seniors. Our seniors have got to know that every Social Security promise will be fulfilled and Social Security checks will arrive on time and that there's not much difference in the overall numbers than what we proposed, what some others have proposed. I'm confident we can come together and get a good budget together, one that will reflect the priorities of the Nation, which will be education and defense.
The President. Well, you know, it's interesting—the question was, what kind of growth rate we need. I would put it this way: We need a new attitude, that in order to earn the confidence of the American people, Congress must set good priorities. And I know the Senator and I share the priorities of national defense and education. Those are our priorities, and we ought to meet those priorities.
All of our citizens need basic education. The greatest resource of any nation is the creative energies of its people. They must gain the skills demanded by a new economic world. Only when literacy and learning are widespread will the benefits of the global economy be widely shared.
Our times present many challenges. Yet I'm confident about our shared future. I know that our region and our world can trade in freedom. I know we can bring health and education and prosperity to our people. And I know we can defeat terror so our children and grandchildren can live in peace and security.
This new enemy seeks to destroy our freedom and impose its views. We value life; the terrorists ruthlessly destroy it. We value education; the terrorists do not believe women should be educated or should have health care or should leave their homes. We value the right to speak our minds; for the terrorists, free expression can be grounds for execution. We respect people of all faiths and welcome the free practice of religion; our enemy wants to dictate how to think and how to worship, even to their fellow Muslims.
The President. Well, first of all, there's a lot of money spent from the Federal level to help—to help with reeducation. And one of the programs that I just mentioned is the use of Federal monies to empower State Governments to provide opportunities for reeducation.
To answer your question, it's about to happen when the Congress passes the education reform bill and the education bill, the funding mechanism necessary for education. But education is a priority not only here, but as my good wife reminded everybody on the radio, it's got to be a priority around the world. There is no excuse for the Taliban Government to have treated women and young girls the way they have and not educated people.
Education is a domestic priority. No question about it, it's a domestic priority. And we're increasing education spending at the Federal Government to help local districts. But we also have got to remind people around the world, if we want peace in the world, other nations must do a better job of treating people with respect by making sure that they are educated, as well.
Speaking about education, you go to school, don't you? Let's hear your question.
Secondly—it goes to this lady's point right here—is to make sure that every child in America is well educated, starting with every child learning to read. There's nothing like an education to provide hope for people. Part of the reason why people are discouraged is because they lose hope. They say, "Well, this society isn't meant for me." A hopeful society is an educated society. And so we've got to make sure we get it right, we have an education— a focus on education, understanding that education is the gateway to such great freedom and opportunity.
We've made some good progress about working together. I'm getting ready to sign an education bill next week. It's a really good piece of legislation. I'm real proud of it. I want to thank the teachers who are here and the people who are concerned about educating our—making sure our public schools are the best they can be. And by the way, the cornerstone of that bill is that every child can learn—every child in America.
And a lot of my friends in Midland, Texas, are going to be amazed when I stand up and say nice things about Ted Kennedy. [Laughter] He deserves it. He worked hard on this education bill. And I can proudly sign it, and I can proudly say I appreciate Senator Kennedy's strong work and input into making this bill a good bill.
The President. Yes. Well, I was sitting in a schoolhouse in Florida. I had gone down to tell my little brother what to do, and—just kidding, Jeb. [Laughter] And— it's the mother in me. [Laughter] Anyway, I was in the midst of learning about a reading program that works. I'm a big believer in basic education, and it starts with making sure every child learns to read. And therefore, we need to focus on the science of reading, not what may feel good or sound good when it comes to teaching children to read. I'm just getting a plug in for my reading initiative.
The President. Thank you. First, let me tell you, I am a big believer in making sure our community colleges remain affordable, available, and flexible. And the reason I believe that is that I understand that the best way to make sure people have got the ability to work is for there to be a training—a retraining opportunity. In other words, communities must figure out how to match up a community college system with jobs that actually exist. It seems like to me, in order for America to be hopeful for everybody, we need to have flexibility, at some point, in the higher education system. And the best place for that flexibility to occur is at the community college level.
Now, higher education takes all kinds of—there's all kinds of different ways to achieve higher education. A community college system is one, a 4-year college; there's others. One of the things I think we need to do is expand the Pell grant system to help people afford higher education.
A second way to make sure we've got sustained economic growth is to make sure our public school system works well. Recently, last week, I had the honor of traveling the country touting the fact that I was able to sign a good education bill. I know I shocked people when I stood up and said, "Ted Kennedy is all right." [Laughter] Probably shocked him more than anybody else. [Laughter]
But we showed what can happen in Washington when you put party politics aside and focus on what's good for the country. And what's good for the country is to make sure our education system produces smart, intelligent, literate children. And this bill I signed goes a long way for helping. It's a great piece of legislation, and I want to thank both Republicans and Democrats for working with me to get an education bill that America can be proud of.
So those are some of the thoughts I wanted to share with you as I travel down the Mississippi River: Good stimulus policy, good economic policy based on trusting people with their own money, good education policy, good trade policy, and a good policy to bring these terrorists to justice.
Together, our nations will continue to cooperate against terror and trafficking in drugs. We will strengthen ties of trade and investment between our nations. We'll work to improve educational and economic opportunities for all Pakistanis, especially women and children. And my Government stands ready to work with all parties on the subcontinent to foster dialog to lower tensions and resolve outstanding issues.
President Bush. Let me first—and I'd like the President to speak on this, basically on the madrasa school issue in Pakistan. One of the things that most impressed me about President Musharraf, that gives me confidence in his vision, is that the last time we met in New York City, we spent a fair amount of time talking about education reform. And the President has placed a very intriguing and very interesting woman in charge of the education system in Pakistan. She used to work in rural areas, a rural province of the country. He's elevated her to Cabinet position because she's a reformer. She understands the modern world requires an education system that trains children in basic sciences and reading and math and the history of Pakistan.
And so our Government is committed to working with the Pakistani Government on education reform. We had a—as I understand that of the $600 million, part of the aid package last year, 100 million of those dollars have gone into education reform. The President will make the decision as to how best to use that. There's 35 million—or 34 million additional dollars this year that will go help on education reform.
I shared with him my passion about education reform here in America, and I want to applaud him for making a visionary statement about education. He knows what I know: An educated child is one much more likely to be able to realize dreams and to be a productive citizen.
Now, within this jihad, education forms a focal area. And since the President wants me to focus particularly on madrasa, in education we are taking three areas of education. One is the madrasa education; the second is the primary and secondary education; and the third is higher education. I would just like to focus on the madrasa education. We have formulated strategies in each one of these three areas.
Now, the weaknesses of some of the madrasas only teaching religious—giving religious education to the children has to be removed. And the children in these madrasas need to be brought into the mainstream of life. And that is what we are doing.
And that fund will be used to encourage—first of all, it will say our country assumes our rightful responsibility to help developing nations, but we expect there to be rightful obligations on those who receive them to make sure that there's an education system that works, a health care system that works, an opportunity for development of an entrepreneurial class or small businesses, foster trade between ourselves. And countries that practice good habits will get money. Now, this is on top of roughly $10 billion which we spend already in direct development aid, not including other projects, assistance to the World Bank organizations, et cetera.
And obviously, countries are going to have to put procedures in place that will allow for the orderly development of a private sector, rule of law, anticorruption measures. No one is going to do business if you get money stolen from you. There's got to be tightening of anticorruption measures. There's got to be a good education system. And part of the Millennium Challenge Fund will help developing nations develop an education system.
One of the things we learned from northern Mexico—the trade—is that trade created a lot of job opportunity. And the job opportunity created training opportunities, which in itself was good education for many people. The border region of my State, while still poor, has changed significantly as a result of the trade policies. And Monterrey has blossomed into one of the great financial centers of the hemisphere because of trade.
And then we expect nations to develop practices that will help the people directly, like good education. I'm the first leader who stood up and said that the World Bank ought to have 50 percent of the money they distribute in the form of grants, not loans—grants to help education and health flourish in developing nations. I think it would be a lot better than, you know, loaning money that in many circumstances can't be repaid. It's hard to get a rate of return in the financial sense on an education system. But you can get a huge rate of return on the capital of human capital, by a good education system.
El Salvador has been a country that has faced enormous difficulties—the war, combat against poverty, earthquakes. And El Salvador has done this through a system of freedoms in the search of a democracy, the search of economic freedom as well— giving people the opportunity—the opportunity to get education, to trade of their products, and to integrate into the new world.
I want to thank mi esposa, Laura, for her—[laughter]—mi amor. I want to thank Sara for her passion for the education of Latino children. She is a—well, she's unique. She's smart; she's capable. After all, she's a tejana. [Laughter] But I really do appreciate her focus, her willingness to work hard to make sure that every child has got the opportunity to realize his or her dreams in America.
I also appreciate service to our Government and our country. I picked two fabulous members of my Cabinet from Asian Pacific backgrounds. You've seen them both. One lady who wasn't born in America, yet because of the dreams of her mother and father and because our country can be a welcoming country, was able to get a good education, and here she sits in the Cabinet of the President of the United States.
And as we fight for a safer world and a peaceful world, we've got to work for a better world here in America. One of the great traditions in our Asian communities is the understanding and love for education. It's amazing how well and how hard Asian youth work in school to get ahead. It is an unbelievably good example for all of us. Educational excellence must be the standard for every child in America. Access to good education must be the goal for every single child. In order to have a better tomorrow, we've got to continually work to make sure that every child gets educated—I mean every child.
And I want the citizens of Florida to stay focused on his education agenda and his education vision. Jeb Bush understands and believes that every child in the State of Florida can learn. He knows that if you set low standards, certain children aren't going to learn. He believes that he's got to set high standards to make sure that every child in this great State learns how to read and write and add and subtract.
How about children whose parents don't speak English as a first language? They're easy to quit on. But under the leadership of Governor Jeb Bush, because he set high standards and holds people accountable for results, his program and his vision will do more to make sure that every child—I mean every single child in this great State—is going to get a good education, and no child will be left behind. I'm proud of you, brother.
NOTE: The President spoke at 6:44 p.m. in the Tuscan Ballroom at the Universal Studios Portofino Hotel. In his remarks, he referred to Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, and his wife, Columba; Charles Bronson, Florida commissioner of agriculture; Charlie Crist, Florida education commissioner; Thomas Gallagher, Florida State treasurer, insurance commissioner, and fire marshal; Al Hoffman, Jr., national finance chairman, Republican National Committee; Al Austin, finance chairman, Republican Party of Florida; Mayor Carolyn Mason of Sarasota, FL; Mayor Glenda Hood of Orlando; Abu Sabaya, a leader of the Abu Sayyaf terrorist group who was killed June 21 by Philippine military forces; and President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo of the Philippines.
I've laid out some initiatives that I'll be further describing to the African people and African nations: an AIDS initiative; the Millennium Challenge Account; our education initiative, where we'll be spending now $600 million over a 5-year period of time; a $100 million to fight terrorism in east Africa. In other words, just a series of specific initiatives behind a well-intentioned administration. And it's important for the leaders to understand precisely what I mean when I talk about these different initiatives.
Secondly, the initiatives I've laid out are bold initiatives. The Millennium Challenge Account is a very bold initiative. We're going to increase our basic developmental aid by 50 percent, with a new approach which basically says we'll reward those countries which make correct choices on behalf of the people of the countries, countries which are not corrupt, countries which focus on the health and education of the people, countries which adopt market-oriented policies which will enable a country to more likely grow in a prosperous fashion, which would then benefit the people.
The President. Well, I would have to say obviously there needs to be an education program, because Usama bin Laden is nothing but a killer who has hijacked a great religion. And he doesn't care about innocent life. And so I would be glad to have that debate with anybody, anywhere. And I would be glad to take those who believe that he is of some kind of remedial value, to his point of view, to the World Trade Center and introduce them to families who lost life for no reason other than the fact that he is a killer.
Before I begin, I do want to talk a little bit about a meeting I just attended. Rend al-Rahim is here—she's the representative from the Iraqi Government, the interim Government, to the United States—as well as Dr. Khadir Abbas, who is the interim Minister of Health. We just had an interesting discussion in the Roosevelt Room about the health needs of Iraq, about the future of the health care system in Iraq. And we were joined by doctors, Iraqi doctors who were anxious to work with theirfellow counterparts here in America to enhance educational opportunities and to get caught up on the latest technologies in health care. The thing that struck me about the meeting was the kind of joy that they expressed about being free. It was a touching meeting, and I want to thank you all for coming.
Two years ago, in this city, world leaders agreed on a vision to expand opportunity and spread prosperity throughout the hemisphere. With this year's Special Summit, we continue to put that vision into action. Through the Inter-American Development Bank, we are expanding access to credit for small-business entrepreneurs, the key engines of growth and job creation for any nation's economy. We're helping nations improve their legal systems to protect property rights so that owners can use their property as collateral to finance the purchase of a home or to start a business. We're investing in the health and education of our peoples, and we're intensifying our common fight against corruption.
The President is absolutely right. The best way to eradicate poverty is to encourage trade between nations. Trade gives people hope and provides opportunity. Obviously, that must be coupled with anticorruption measures, like the President has done here in Mexico. It must be coupled with good education measures. At this meeting, we're going to talk about ways to get capital into the hands of the entrepreneurial classes of respective countries. But without trade, there's going to be— it's going to be hard for some people to find opportunity.
We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice: We can go forward with confidence and resolve, or we can turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us. We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare, or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.
One of the worst decisions our children can make is to gamble their lives and futures on drugs. Our Government is helping parents confront this problem with aggressive education, treatment, and law enforcement. Drug use in high school has declined by 11 percent over the last 2 years. Four hundred thousand fewer young people are using illegal drugs than in the year 2001. In my budget, I propose new funding to continue our aggressive, community-based strategy to reduce demand for illegal drugs. Drug testing in our schools has proven to be an effective part of this effort. So tonight I propose an additional 23 million for schools that want to use drug testing as a tool to save children's lives. The aim here is not to punish children but to send them this message: We love you, and we do not want to lose you.
The President. That's a really—first of all, being a single mom is the toughest job in America. Being a single mom who needs more education and has the desire to do so is doubly tough. And yours is a wonderful story. It is a story that others need to listen to. If you're worried about your skill set, you're never too old to learn. As a matter of fact, we all learn in different ways, don't we? You've been able to take your desire to do your duty as a responsible citizen and convert it to a employable skill.
We've increased Federal education spending, particularly for poor students, dramatically. But now, for the first time, we're asking the question, "Are we meeting expectations?" In return for increased Federal spending, the Federal Government is saying to local districts, "Show us whether or not the children are learning to read and write and add and subtract." I don't think that's too much. I don't think it's too much to increase budgets and in return say, "What are the results?" If you believe every child can learn to read and write and add and subtract, then you're not afraid to ask the question: Are they learning to read and write and add and subtract?
Education—what I'm telling you is as the economy changes, there's tremendous opportunities for workers. We've just got to make sure the education system matches people with the skills necessary for the 21st century. And that's what this administration is going to do.
I appreciate my temporary Mayor, Mayor Williams. He's a really good guy. He's the Mayor of Washington, DC. I notice you were over lobbying Laura the other day to handle a project. [Laughter] He knows where the power is in the White House. [Laughter] I appreciate you, Tony. He's a good fellow. We worked hard on an interesting education initiative. He took a bold leadership position on education, and we worked with the Congress to get some scholarship money to poor students in Washington, DC, who are going to schools that are failing, that will help liberate them and their parents to be able to choose new schools. And this is a landmark piece of legislation that's going to change people's lives for the better. And the Mayor showed strong leadership. He got out on front on a tough issue, and as a result, the children of this city are going to benefit. And I appreciate you, Mayor, a lot for taking that on.
We've got members of the State senate. Roy Ashburn is with us. I've known Roy for a while. He's a good fellow. State assembly—Bill Maze is with us. I thank Bill for being here. I want to thank all the local officials and all the citizens who have taken time out of your day to come by and to listen to what I hope is an educational dialog.
The President. You're really successful, successful because you love your kids more than anything else, successful because you—you set education as priority for your family. This good family saved about $3,400 because of the tax relief. If Congress doesn't go up—act, their taxes are going up by $3,100, see?
The other thing that productivity requires is an acknowledgment that new jobs require new skills. If you think about it, things are changing in the workplace, and we better have an education system that encourages—that allows workers to find the new skills necessary to be able to meet the challenges and new jobs of the 21st century.
By measuring, we're able to determine whether a curriculum works. By measuring, we're able to determine whether a child needs extra help. There's money in the Federal budget to provide the extra help. By measuring, we can find out whether or not society is doing its duty to make sure every child gets a quality education. The No Child Left Behind Act is a great piece of legislation, and I will defend it with every fiber in my body.
There are other things we need to do. There needs to be remedial education for high school kids. Listen, because we're late in the accountability process, we didn't know for a while whether or not kids were getting shuffled through, and there's probably some in high school that can't read. And now is the time to find those souls and make sure they read.
Laura went down to a program in Florida the other day, a remedial education program, where they're able to take 10th graders, with intense education in a 6-month period, to get them up to—nearly to grade level or at grade level. There's some great things that are happening in education. The Federal Government has a responsibility to help State and local governments focus resources to make sure people aren't left behind.
I tell you, another interesting opportunity is community colleges. Everybody can identify with the community college in the community in which they live, and there's some great community colleges. The interesting thing about community colleges is, is that the curriculum should be flexible. And when you can find a place of higher learning that's got a flexible curriculum, it means if you're an employer or a group of employers, you can go to your community college and say, "Look, we need nurses. Help us train nurses. Adjust your education system for the jobs which actually exist."
A couple of other things that I want to say, now that I got you. [Laughter] There was a period of time in the seventies and eighties—I don't know if you remember this or not—when a lot of people doubted America, doubted whether we can compete. Do you remember that? The Japanese were going to be the predominate economy in the world, some would say, or the Germans would be. It was claimed that we weren't flexible enough. Our companies were—we had rigid rules, that the workers were not disciplined enough, that the American products really weren't good enough to compete. That's what a lot of people thought. Those were what we called the pessimists. And they were wrong. They were just flat wrong, obviously. I mean, America—we improved. We changed. We're flexible. Our education systems began to work better. The entrepreneurial spirit remained strong. We're the greatest economy in the world now, and it's important that we keep it that way with good policies.
The more users there are, the more likely it is people will be able to have interesting new ways to receive doctors' advices in the home. The more affordable broadband technology is, the more innovative we can be with education. It's important that we stay on the cutting edge of technological change, and one way to do so is to have a bold plan for broadband.
I think one—you know, look, you can't read a newspaper if you can't read. And so one of the most important initiatives of this administration was to challenge the soft bigotry of low expectations. You know what I mean by that. If you lower the bar, guess what happens? You get lousy results. And that's the way it was in American public schools 3 1/2 years ago. That's why you had kids just shuffled from grade to grade, year to year, without learning the basics of education. That's the way it was, because there was no accountability. See, we weren't measuring.
There's more to do. We've got to make sure our higher education is available for everybody. We've increased the number of students receiving Pell grants by a million since I've been President. We've got historic levels of funding for our black colleges. I told the Native Americans we will see that their school systems were modernized. We spent $1.1 billion of Indian school construction repair since 2001, more than double spending in the previous 4 years. I told people we'd focus on schools, and we are. And we're making progress in America.
Now, the Federal Government has got a responsibility on matters like education and security to help, and health care. And it's a solemn duty. And from this perspective, we must continue to uphold that duty.
I think that one of the most promising areas of all is to help with economic development. And that means helping people understand what it means to start a business. That's why the Small Business Administration has increased loans. It means, obviously, encouraging capital flows. But none of that will happen unless the education systems flourish and are strong, and that's why I told you we've spent $1.1 billion in the reconstruction of Native American schools.
When I was the Governor of Texas, there was concerns that our big institutions were not—big educational institutions were not diversified enough. So I went to the legislature and said, "Why don't we work together and say that there's automatic admission to our universities if you finish in the top 10 percent of your high school class, no matter what high school you go to." And it worked. It worked because the student bodies began to diversify at the University of Texas and at Texas A&amp;M. And—that's an inside joke up here. [Laughter] You're about to hear why.
And so the No Child Left Behind Act sets high expectations and high standards. It believes in local control of schools. It believes in empowering parents. But it also says, "Let's measure to determine whether curriculum works, to determine whether or not our children are learning to read." And if not, let's correct the problem before it is too late. And we're making good progress. These test scores are beginning to rise. The achievement gap is beginning to close. And what I'm telling you is there's more work to do when it comes to the education. I want the high school diploma to mean something. We need to focus on math and science to make sure our youngsters have the skills necessary to compete in this world. I like to tell people we've— we're getting the job done when it comes to our schools. And by making our schools work, America will be a better place.
Finally, let me talk about two quick things, and then we're going to talk to some of your fellow citizens here. One, education is really important for workers. If we want to keep jobs here in America, we better have a system that enables people to become retrained for the jobs which exist. That's why I'm a big backer of the community college system, and it's a system that's working. It's a system that is available and affordable. They're everywhere, at reasonable price, and there's plenty of Government aid to help.
So I travel the country a lot. And let me tell you an interesting story. I met a lady in Phoenix, Arizona, went to Mesa Community College. She had worked for 12 years as a graphic artist. She decided to go back to college, got a little help to do so, went back and got an associates degree. And her—in other words, she enhanced her skills. And her first job out of the community college paid more in her first year than she was making in her 12th year as a graphic artist. In other words, what education does is it makes you a more productive worker. And Government has got to encourage people to go back to community college by helping them to do so.
The President. There you go. [Laughter] All education begins at home, by the way.
Now, I'm going to reverse that. I'm going to change that. We're going to restore the fiscal discipline we had in the 1990s. Every plan that I have laid out, my health care plan, my plan for education, my plan for kids to be able to get better college loans, I've shown exactly how I'm going to pay for those. And we start—we don't do it exclusively, but we start by rolling back George Bush's unaffordable tax cut for the wealthiest people, people earning more than $200,000 a year, and we pass, hopefully, the McCain/Kerry commission, which identified some $60 billion that we can get. We shut the loophole which has American workers actually subsidizing the loss of their own job. They just passed an expansion of that loophole in the last few days, $43 billion of giveaways, including favors to the oil and gas industry and to people importing ceiling fans from China.
I'm going to stand up and fight for the American worker, and I'm going to do it in a way that's fiscally sound. I show how I pay for the health care, how we pay for the education. I have a manufacturing jobs credit. We pay for it by shutting that loophole overseas. We raise the student loans. I pay for it by changing the relationship with the banks. This President has never once vetoed one bill, the first President in 100 years not to do that.
President Bush. I say, Bob, "I've got policies to continue to grow our economy and create the jobs of the 21st century, and here's some help for you to go get an education. Here's some help for you to go to a community college. We've expanded trade adjustment assistance. We want to help pay for you to gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century."
You know, there's a lot of talk about how to keep the economy growing, and we talk about fiscal matters. But perhaps the best way to keep jobs here in America and to keep this economy growing is to make sure our education system works.
I went to Washington to solve problems. And I saw a problem in the public education system in America. They were just shuffling too many kids through the system, year after year, grade after grade, without learning the basics. And so we said, "Let's raise the standards. We're spending more money, but let's raise the standards and measure early and solve problems now, before it's too late."
You know, education is how to help the person who has lost a job. Education is how to make sure this—we've got a workforce that's productive and competitive. You got—4 more years, I've got more to do to continue to raise standards, to continue to reward teachers and school districts that are working, to emphasize math and science in the classrooms, to continue to expand Pell grants, to make sure that people have an opportunity to start their career with a college diploma.
Senator Kerry. I want you to notice how the President switched away from jobs and started talking about education principally. Let me come back in one moment to that, but I want to speak for a second, if I can, to what the President said about fiscal responsibility. Being lectured by the President on fiscal responsibility is a little bit like Tony Soprano talking to me about law and order in this country. [Laughter]
But let me talk about what's really important for the worker you're referring to, and that's to make sure the education system works, is to make sure we raise standards. Listen, the No Child Left Behind Act is really a jobs act when you think about it. The No Child Left Behind Act says, "We'll raise standards. We'll increase Federal spending, but in return for extra spending, we now want people to measure—States and local jurisdictions to measure, to show us whether or not a child can read or write or add and subtract." You cannot solve a problem unless you diagnose the problem, and we weren't diagnosing problems. And therefore, just kids were being shuffled through the school. And guess who would get shuffled through? Children whose parents wouldn't speak English as first language, just moved through; many inner-city kids, just moved through. We've stopped that practice now by measuring early, and when we find a problem, we spend extra money to correct it.
I remember a lady in Houston, Texas, telling me reading is the new civil right. And she's right. In order to make sure people have jobs for the 21st century, we've got to get it right in the education system. And we're beginning to close a minority achievement gap now. You see, we'd never be able to compete in the 21st century unless we have an education system that doesn't quit on children, an education system that raises standards, an education that makes sure there's excellence in every classroom.
Now, right here in Arizona, that difference would have been $131 million to the State of Arizona to help its kids be able to have better education and to lift the property tax burden from its citizens. The President reneged on his promise to fund No Child Left Behind. He will tell you he's raised the money, and he has, but he didn't put in what he promised. And that makes a difference in the lives of our children.
And secondly, only a liberal Senator from Massachusetts would say that a 49-percent increase in funding for education was not enough. We've increased funds, but more importantly, we've reformed the system to make sure that we solve problems early, before they're too late. He talked about the unemployed. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. He talked about children whose parents don't speak English as a first language. Absolutely, we've got to make sure they get educated. And that's what the No Child Left Behind Act does.
And secondly, like my opponent, I don't agree we ought to have quotas—I agree, we shouldn't have quotas. But we ought to have an aggressive effort to make sure people are educated, to make sure when they get out of high school there's Pell grants available for them, which is what we've done. We've expanded Pell grants by a million students. Do you realize, today in America, we spend $73 billion to help 10 million low- and middle-income families better afford college? That's the access I believe is necessary, is to make sure every child learns to read, write, add, and subtract early, to be able to build on that education by going to college so they can start their careers with a college diploma.
I've known Margaret Spellings for more than a decade. I have relied on her intellect and judgment throughout my career in public service. As Governor of Texas, I called on her to serve the children of our State as my chief education adviser, a job she carried out with conviction and great results.
With the Senate's approval, Margaret Spellings will continue the work of a fine educator and leader, Secretary Rod Paige. As Secretary of Education, this humble and decent man inspired his Department and implemented the most significant Federal education reform in a generation. Today, thanks to the No Child Left Behind Act, students of every background are making hopeful progress in reading and math. The Nation's schools are stronger because of Rod Paige's leadership. I'm grateful for his friendship. I'm grateful for his years of service.
The issue of education is close to my heart. And on this vital issue, there is no one I trust more than Margaret Spellings. Two decades ago, as a young aide in the Texas State legislature, Margaret dedicated herself to strengthening public schools. She went on to help lead the Texas Association of School Boards, to advise two Governors on school reform, and to serve 4 years as my top domestic policy adviser right here in the White House. And now her talent and idealism have brought her to the highest education office in the land. Through it all, she has kept her good humor and her perspective on life. She is a devoted, loving mother to Mary and Grace, and Laura and I are proud to count her and Robert as good friends.
The President. Yes, I appreciate that question. First of all, let me put the Social Security issue in proper perspective. It is a very important issue, but it's not the only issue, very important issue we'll be dealing with. I expect the Congress to bring forth meaningful tort reform. I want the legal system reformed in such a way that we are competitive in the world. I'll be talking about the budget, of course. There is a lot of concern in the financial markets about our deficits, short-term and long-term deficits. The long-term deficit, of course, is caused by some of the entitlement programs, the unfunded liabilities inherent in our entitlement programs. I will continue to push on an education agenda. There's no doubt in my mind that the No Child Left Behind Act is meaningful, real, reform that is having real results. And I look forward to strengthening No Child Left Behind. Immigration reform is a very important agenda item as we move forward.
The President. Civil rights is a good education. Civil rights is opportunity. Civil rights is homeownership. Civil rights is owning your own business. Civil rights is making sure all aspects of our society are open for everybody. And we discussed that yesterday. And I believe that what I said was important, that we've got to shed ourselves of bigotry if we expect to lead by example. And I'll do the very best I can as the President to make sure that the promise—and I believe in the promise of America—is available for everybody.
To make our economy stronger and more dynamic, we must prepare a rising generation to fill the jobs of the 21st century. Under the No Child Left Behind Act, standards are higher, test scores are on the rise, and we're closing the achievement gap for minority students. Now we must demand better results from our high schools, so every high school diploma is a ticket to success. We will help an additional 200,000 workers to get training for a better career by reforming our job training system and strengthening America's community colleges. And we'll make it easier for Americans to afford a college education by increasing the size of Pell grants.
To keep America competitive, we've got to make sure that the education system works. The No Child Left Behind Act is working. We have challenged and are challenging the soft bigotry of low expectations. We will not stand for a school system that gives up on kids and just moves them through. So now we're asking the question, "Can you read and write and add and subtract?" And when we find a child that needs help, we're providing help early, before it's too late. There's nothing better than setting high standards and having accountability to make sure every child learns. And it's working. There's an achievement gap in America that is growing—is narrowing every year. And we've now got to extend those reforms to our high schools so that a high school diploma means something.
The fastest growing occupations in America require at least 2 years of college. And so we're going to reform our job training system and strengthen our community colleges to help thousands of workers get the—gain the skills they need to fill the jobs of the 21st century. You know, one of the wonderful things about the community college system is that they're flexible, and they're available, and they're affordable. And for those youngsters who cannot afford a community college or for those workers who cannot, we're going to increase the size of Pell grants to help them afford a community college and/or a college education.
What we want is, we want the education system to actually educate people for the jobs which exist. And that's why I'm such a big believer in the community college system. Curricula can change with the times. Flexibility is important when it comes to helping our workers gain the skills necessary to fill the jobs of the 21st century.
Concrete action will be taken as far as quality of life issues, health, education. I repeat, we are going to write these down, write these objectives down in black and white and carry out—and have this plan well configured and consolidated within the next 90 days to make sure that it is feasible, because all of us have a sense of urgency. We want to make North America into the most competitive region in the world, and we can do it with actions in the fields of energy, education, technology, security, and through protecting our natural resources. This should serve to give us the level of competitiveness that we seek.
What we're talking about today is new programs and plans with prescription drugs becoming available for our seniors. This is as much an education exercise as anything else, because I fully understand and our Government fully understands, many seniors don't want to change. They're not interested in change. And therefore, what I'm telling you is, is that, at least listen to what's available. You don't have to change if you don't want to, but at least be open-minded enough to listen. And our panelists today are going to represent different constituencies that will help seniors understand what's available.
Ms. Bryan. Well, we actually have a continuing education system for all the pharmacists.
President Bush and I have the same optimistic vision on our bilateral relations. There have been many advances following our first meeting in 2003. The working groups that we created on growth, agriculture, and energy have brought significant results. And we have now decided to advance in other strategic fields. We will begin high-level cooperation in science and technology and intensify our educational partnerships in areas such as biodiversity and agriculture. In the area of health, we will be opening up new fronts for cooperation to fight diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, AIDS, and threats such as the avian flu pandemic.
Our Nation has been strengthened by generations of immigrants who became Americans through patience and hard work and assimilation. In this new century, we must continue to welcome immigrants and to set high standards for those who follow the laws to become a part of our country. Every new citizen of the United States has an obligation to learn our customs and values, including liberty and civic responsibility, equality under God and tolerance for others, and the English language. We will continue to pursue policies that encourage ownership, excellence in education, and give all our citizens a chance to realize the American Dream.
We've got more work to do in this coming year. To keep our economy growing, we need to keep taxes low and make the tax relief permanent. We must restrain Government spending, and I'm pleased that the House today has voted to rein in entitlement spending by $40 billion, and I urge the United States Senate to join them. We must reduce junk lawsuits and strengthen our education system and give more Americans the ability to obtain affordable health insurance. We must pass comprehensive immigration reform that protects our borders, strengthens enforcement, and creates a new temporary-worker program that relieves pressure on the border but rejects amnesty.
I appreciate the Congress, and I'm looking forward to the Senate confirming—affirming the U.S. Congress's decisions to fund the education or reimburse States for education. There's some good health care initiatives in the bill. We want to make sure that people don't get booted out of housing. We want to work carefully to make sure people understand that there are benefits or help available that—for them to find housing. We want to continue to move temporary housing on the gulf coast of Mississippi so people can get better— closer to their neighborhoods and get their homes rebuilt. We want to start helping Mayor Nagin get temporary housing near New Orleans so as this economy comes back, people will be able to find jobs.
Now, you talked about—and we have an opportunity, by the way, in New Orleans, for example, to make sure the education system works, to make sure that we promote ownership. I think it is vitally important for ownership to extend to more than just a single community. I think the more African Americans own their own business, the better off America is. I feel strongly that if we can get people to own and manage their own retirement accounts, like personal accounts and Social Security, it makes society a better place. I want people to be able to say, "This is my asset." Heretofore, kind of asset accumulation may have been only a part of—a single—a part of— a segmented part of our strategy. We want assets being passed from one generation to the next. I take pride in this statistic, that more African Americans own a home, or more minorities own a home, now than ever before in our Nation's history, not just African Americans. That's positive.
But this economy is going. Small businesses are flourishing. They got a—they had to deal with gasoline subsidies. Saddam Hussein, in order to make sure people kept him around and thought he was all right— they didn't have much choice, by the way, because he had a force behind him—but, nevertheless, he subsidized gasoline, which meant a lot of the central budget was going for subsidization of fuel, as opposed to education and health. And so the new Government made a difficult decision; they started floating that price of gasoline up a little higher, to take the pressure off their budget and to introduce markets, market-based forces into the economy.
The President. No, I appreciate it. Listen, part of security is economic security. And one way to make sure we're economically secure in a competitive world is to make sure every child gets a good education. It's a huge issue for America to make sure the public school system functions.
You can't solve a problem until you diagnose it. And I was worried—when I was the Governor of my own State, I was worried about a system that did not test. And so we were just kind of hoping things went well, and we're just going to shuffle through. And guess who gets shuffled through? Poor black kids get shuffled through. Young Latinos get shuffled through. You know, let's just kind of socially promote them. And so step one of making sure that the education system works is to measure to determine whether it is working.
One of my initiatives, and one that I hope you're taking advantage of here in Kentucky, is the use of the community college system. The community college system is really an interesting part of our education network and fabric because the community colleges are available; in other words, they're plentiful. They are affordable, relative to the different kinds of higher education institutions. And interestingly enough, I'd like to describe them as they're market driven, if run properly. In other words, their curriculum can adjust.
In recent years, you and I have taken unprecedented action to fight AIDS and malaria, expand the education of girls, and reward developing nations that are moving forward with economic and political reform. For people everywhere, the United States is a partner for a better life. Shortchanging these efforts would increase the suffering and chaos of our world, undercut our long-term security, and dull the conscience of our country. I urge Members of Congress to serve the interests of America by showing the compassion of America.
These gains are evidence of a quiet transformation, a revolution of conscience, in which a rising generation is finding that a life of personal responsibility is a life of fulfillment. Government has played a role. Wise policies, such as welfare reform and drug education and support for abstinence and adoption have made a difference in the character of our country. And everyone here tonight, Democrat and Republican, has a right to be proud of this record.
A little later on, I'm going to talk about a key component of the competitive agenda, and that is to make sure our folks are educated for the jobs of the 21st century. And I will tell you that Lamar had a lot to do with planting this in my mind. He's, as you know, made his fame here in Tennessee for being a great education Governor. You'll be pleased to hear he's carried over that passion into the Halls of the United States Senate. And so in case I forget to give him credit later on, he deserves a lot of credit for making sure that we're competitive in the 21st century.
People say, "What do you mean by that?" I say, the best thing to think about is what life was like in Afghanistan for the Taliban—under the Taliban, for the people under the Taliban. It's a life where young girls couldn't get an education. Think about that. You talk about a dark vision of the future—it's a life where if you didn't agree with their view of religion, you were punished. It's a life in which freedom of expression was not encouraged. It was a dim view of the world. That's what these people think like.
For those of you who are young, I want you to watch the spread of freedom in our world. It's amazing to see, when you think about it. The vote in Afghanistan was part of freedom's march. The vote in Iraq is part of freedom's march. People in Lebanon want to be free from Syria, and we're working—the Palestinians voted. Now, that election was an important election because it said what the people on the street wanted. They wanted clean government. They want people to pay attention to the education needs and their health needs. In order for us to—and Hamas, by the way, now has a choice to make. If they want to work with the United States of America, they must renounce their desire to destroy Israel; they must be a partner in peace.
Finally, I want to spend a little time on education, briefly. First of all, No Child Left Behind Act is working. It's a piece of legislation that says, "We're going to raise the standards for every child, and we're going to measure to make sure children are meeting those standards." Can you imagine—you might remember the old— well, I'll tell you. When I was Governor of Texas, we had a system that didn't measure right early on. And guess what happened? We just shuffled kids through the system who couldn't read, and we found out too late. And that is a terrible system. It lets people down. And we're spending a lot of your money. It seems like to me, it makes sense to say, when we spend your money, we ought to insist upon results. Results are good for the taxpayers; more importantly, they're good for the students. So now we measure early, before it's too late, and we're correcting problems, before they're too late. And our kids are learning to read.
Eddie is an award-winning economist from Stanford University. He's been a part of the Hoover Institute. He's taught and lectured in Asia and the Middle East and Europe. He's advised Governments in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe on economic reform. He's conducted path-breaking research in the field of labor economics. He's applied his theories to real-world problems like education and immigration and compensation and productivity. He's well-rounded, and he's plenty smart.
Unfortunately, in 2004, the local security forces there in Tall 'Afar weren't able to maintain order, and so the terrorists and the insurgents eventually moved back into the town. Because the terrorists threatened to murder the families of Tall 'Afar's police, its members rarely ventured out from the headquarters in an old Ottoman fortress. The terrorists also took over local mosques, forcing local imams out and insisting that the terrorist message of hatred and intolerance and violence be spread from the mosques. The same happened in Tall 'Afar's schools, where the terrorists eliminated real education and instead indoctrinated young men in their hateful ideology. By November of 2004, 2 months after our operation to clear the city, the terrorists had returned to continue their brutal campaign of intimidation.
The President. Absolutely. Thanks. Let me start with education, which I view as a vital part of providing hope and eradicating poverty. I was disturbed, when I was the Governor of Texas, disturbed about a system that just moved kids through. There was kind of a process-oriented world, that said, "Okay, if you're 10, you're supposed to be here; you're 12, you're supposed to be here," and on through. It was like— without any sense of accountability. If you believe education is one of the cornerstones to a hopeful world, then it seems like to me, it makes sense that we've got to have a system that measures so we know whether or not people are getting educated.
And so step one, in my judgment, to address exactly what you described as true—kind of this enlightenment that, uh-oh, there are parts of our society in which people are, in fact, being completely left behind—is to make sure the education system is rigorously based upon accountability. And when we find the status quo is unacceptable, have the political courage to change, demand high standards and change.
And the cornerstone of demanding change in a system that tends to protect itself is measurement. And I realize there are people in my party who want to undo No Child Left Behind. And I'm sure there are in the other party. But my judgment is, you can't achieve educational excellence unless you measure and correct problems.
Now, there's another aspect to providing a hopeful society, and that is to encourage ownership. One of the interesting things about Katrina, as you well know, is many of the people displaced did not own their own homes, that they were renters. One of the goals that I set for my administration through a variety of pretty simple pro-grams—like helping with downpayment and education programs, recognizing that interest rates drive most of the housing purchases—was to encourage minority home-ownership. It's now at an alltime high.
And so I—look, many Americans kind of were—didn't really realize what's taking place in parts of the country that you've described. And Katrina was a wake-up call for many Americans. And now there's an opportunity, in my judgment, to take—well, for people to take notice and put in pol-icy—put policies in place that help those who need help, like community health centers, or—for health care—or expand educational opportunities through rigorous accountability systems, and, I repeat, demanding change where change is due— needed, and promoting ownership.
We cannot take our growing economy for granted, and so I look forward to working with the Congress to make sure we invest in basic research and promote math and science education. I'm going to work with Congress to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. I know it came as a surprise to some of you that I would stand up in front of the Congress and say, "We got a problem; we're addicted to oil." But it is a problem. And I look forward to working with both Republicans and Democrats to advance an agenda that will make us less dependent on foreign oil, an agenda that includes hybrid cars, advanced ethanol fuels, and hydrogen cells. I'm going to look forward to working with Congress to make sure health care is affordable and available.
We're conducting outreach programs with faith-based and community groups to offer civics and English language courses. My administration will continue to pursue policies that open a path to education and jobs, promote ownership, and to give every citizen a chance to realize the American Dream.
And I appreciate Vicente's understanding that education programs are vital. People have got to have a skill set in order to be able to make sure that jobs are—that jobs spread throughout the country. And for a period of time, many people used to come across the border from the border regions, but prosperity, as I mentioned to you, is visible. The life has changed on the border. But the prosperity on the border has caused people from other parts of the country who are looking for work to migrate north, come across the border, and try to find jobs in the United States.
The Millennium Challenge Account, the idea behind it was, is that nations are capable of defeating corruption; they are capable of investing in health and education for their citizens; and they are capable about supporting market-oriented economies. If you believe that, then why shouldn't our aid say, you get aid in return for fighting corruption, investing in the health and education of your citizens, and putting market-oriented economic measures in place?
Summarizing, we have to increase competitiveness of our economies, of our companies, our enterprises, our structures, and likewise, our technological and educational levels so as to face competition of other blocs in the world. We have to homogenize normotivity standards so as to have common standards to facilitate jobs and productivity. We have to make borders much more modern with technology so as to guarantee security but the good flow of commodities and products. We have invested a good amount of time to logistics, efficiency and efficacy in customs, topics that have to do with sharing—sharing these efficiencies.
This generation—this generation was given the gift of the best education in American history, yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of 10 fourth graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book. And still this administration continues on the same old path, the same old programs, while millions are trapped in schools where violence is common and learning is rare.
On education, too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade to grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge. This is discrimination, pure and simple, the soft bigotry of low expectations. And our nation...[applause]
When these problems are not confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth, technology, education and ambition. On the other side of that wall are poverty and prison, addiction and despair. And my fellow Americans, we must tear down that wall.
This generation was given the gift of the best education in American history. Yet we do not share that gift with everyone. Seven of ten fourth-graders in our highest poverty schools cannot read a simple children's book.
On education ... Too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade-to-grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge.
When these problems aren't confronted, it builds a wall within our nation. On one side are wealth and technology, education and ambition.
President Fox and I will get started at his ranch tomorrow. I'm looking forward to hearing his ideas on expanding trade throughout the hemisphere, on safe and orderly migration, on expanding educational opportunity for all our children, and what we can do together to fight drug trafficking and other types of organized crime.
I have a reasonable and balanced budget. It meets growing needs with a responsible rate of increase in spending. It funds priorities. And my administration has no higher priority than education.
The President. David, I—as far as this White House is concerned, it's time to go forward. I've too much to do to get a budget passed, to get reforms passed for education, to get a tax cut passed, to strengthen the military, than to be worrying about decisions that my predecessor made.
There's a lot of discussion about education reform on the Hill, and I'm confident that the focus will be the right focus. And my speech Tuesday night, I hope, will help keep the focus on the agenda.
The President. It suggests that—first of all, the data shows the economy is sputtering. Secondly, it suggests strongly that the taxpayer is being overcharged. And one of the things this administration is going to do is going to go to the Congress and say, "Here are the priorities: Our priorities are public education, the military, Social Security and Medicare, health care for the working uninsured." But by having commonsense budgeting, we're going to also show the people that there is ample money for them to be able to spend. And that's going to be very important to make sure the sputtering economy recovers.
I've written a budget based upon my vision of an active and responsible Government. Now, I recognize Government has got important work to do; yet, active Government must also be focused and effective. Education is my top priority, and frankly, it ought to be your top priority, as well. After all, an industry which depends on the ability of people to read needs to be involved in education. Children who fail to master reading are going to be left behind in America, and we had better do something about it.
My budget reflects the commitment to education. It increases—it has an 11 percent increase in the Department of Education. We triple funding for reading programs. We have got a big focus on early childhood development.
We've prepared a budget with great care. I understand to budget is to choose, so I made choices. We identified priorities: education and health care, research, military pay, conservation, community and faith-based organizations. I gave those priorities the funding they needed, while keeping overall discretionary spending at a responsible rate of 4 percent growth. The result is a budget that keeps our national commitment to Social Security and Medicare, and increases the Federal budget by $100 billion from 2001 to 2002. A $100 billion increase in spending ought to be sufficient.
I've been most impressed by the discussions we've had. It's clear to me that ours is a hemisphere united by freedom. It's a partnership that will help us tackle the big challenges that we all face: the education of our children, HIV/AIDS, protecting our environment. It's a strong partnership. It's a partnership that will help us all achieve what we want—is that everybody in our respective countries are able to succeed and realize their dreams.
Secondly, I said, give us a chance—and we had put together a group of Congressmen and Senators to pass meaningful, real reform of our education system, one that would empower local folks, to give more power at the local level because we recognize one size does not fit all when it comes to the education of the children, but also one that says, if you receive Federal money, show us whether or not children are learning to read and write and add and subtract, because we want to know. We want to know whether or not the very faces of our future are learning, and if they're not— if they're not, we won't sit idly by in America. When we find youngsters who can't read, we'll correct the problems early, before it's too late, because our motto is, "Not one single child will be left behind in America."
Another item on the prosperity agenda is education reform. And here, too, the spirit of cooperation and the spirit of getting things done in Washington is producing results for the American people. The House has passed, overwhelmingly— and I hope the Senate will pass soon— the most significant education reform in 35 years. These bipartisan reforms will require testing of all schoolchildren in grades three through eight to make sure that they are learning.
These reforms will direct additional resources to those who need help. They will give new options to parents of children in persistently failing schools. They will reduce Federal bureaucracy and strengthen local control of schools. They will help local schools reach a significant goal by funding early childhood reading programs. We will more likely make sure that no child is left behind in America. Education reform is essential to keep faith with our country's promise of equality of opportunity, and education reform is essential to our economic progress.
Another important part of making sure that your future is bright is that the education systems all around America work. One of the things I took great pride in, in the State of Texas, is an education reform package for all of the people that go to school in Texas that said, "We expect results." I will tell you this: If you're in the agricultural sector, you're judged by results. You're judged by the size of the crop you grow. You're judged whether or not you can plow the straight line. You're judged by whether you're not any good. It's a results-oriented world, and that's what education ought to be, as well.
Laura, my wife, the First Lady, is having a seminar, series of seminars about how to introduce the sound science of education into curriculum all around the country. It says, "Look, let's have some common sense about our education curriculum. Let's make sure it works before we insist that we use it." And that's what we need to do in education. We need to have strong accountability.
Again, I want to thank the Members of the Senate and the House who are here, who support an education package that's going to reform schools all around the country. But make no mistake about it: I haven't forgotten where I came from. Inherent in the education reform package is a strong belief in local control of schools. I don't think the schools ought to be run out of Washington. You know why? Because we're different. School districts in Texas were different. And they're a heck of a lot different, I can assure you, from, you know, places like Vermont and New Hampshire. I mean, it's just a different world, and therefore we've got to have strong local control of schools, coupled with strong accountability, to make sure our education systems work for everybody, urban and rural alike.
I have a better idea. Let's abandon the old ways of gamesmanship, standoffs, and Government shutdowns. Let us keep our priorities straight and start with the things that matter most to our country's security and our country's future. This year, let us have responsible spending from day one and put the national security and education of our children first in line when it comes to the appropriations process.
A second area where we're making great progress is in public education. There is a good, strong reform bill that passed our House of Representatives and a good strong reform bill that passed the United States Senate. And when we come back, after the so-called vacation—[laughter]— people need to get the education bill to my desk.
And let me talk to you about it right quick. First of all, lest you think I forgot where I came from, one of the key components in the education bill is to trust the local folks when it comes to running public education. I strongly believe in local control of our schools. I don't believe Washington has got all the answers on how to run the schools. I do believe we need to pass power out of Washington, to give school districts more flexibility, more authority. And both these bills do that, and that's an important component of the bill.
But secondly, these bills challenge what I call the soft bigotry of low expectations. It recognizes that too often in our public education system, we lower the bar for students. Some folks believe, I guess, some kids can't learn. That's the opposite of what I think. I think every child can learn. I think we ought to have the high expectations. We expect high standards, and we expect people to deliver on those standards. And therefore, one of the key components of reform is to say to school districts, States all across our country, that if you receive Federal money, you must measure. You must devise an accountability system to let us know whether our children are learning to read and write and add and subtract.
The education bill is a good bill. I look forward to signing it. It is a sign that we're making progress on getting things done.
See, the first discussion we had was, we set the budget, the parameters, about the limits of spending. And now the Members of Congress are coming back, and they're going to actually commit taxpayer's money. And it's going to be an interesting discussion. Now, tomorrow my Office of Management and Budget will issue what's called a mid-session budget review and will show in plain terms that we have fully funded and will be able to fully fund our Nation's priorities, that we've got enough money to preserve and protect Social Security, that we'll pay down over $100 billion of public debt, that Medicare, all Medicare, every dime that comes into Medicare, will be spent on Medicare, and we can meet our priorities when it comes to our military and to education.
And finally—[laughter]—and finally, one of the temptations, and perhaps the greatest temptation of all, is what we call appropriations gamesmanship. And here's the way it works. We've got a budget of X amount, and you add up all the potential appropriations bills. The budget amount is X. And so they'll pass one bill of the 13, and they may add a little bit here. Then they'll pass another bill, all still within the budget. And they finally get to the last appropriations bills, and all of a sudden, if the budget amount becomes the appropriated amount, we busted the budget, because of all the previous bills have added a little here or there. And guess what generally is the last ones out? Defense—the defense bill. In other words, they'll put it on the President's desk and say, "You either get to bust the budget, Mr. President, or you have to choose between defense or perhaps education." That's gamesmanship. And that's not necessary, folks. That's not good to play with our national security or our national interests in educating every child.
And so what I expect and hope is that Congress will, at the very minimum, agree on the funding levels for defense and education early in the process, not late. This will be an interesting test of the priorities of the leaders of Congress. It will be an interesting test to see whether or not they agree with the administration that our true priorities begin with educating our children, and a true priority is the defense of our Nation. I'm confident we can work together, but it's going to require the people to help us watch the process. The people need to pay attention. And if you see the appropriations process dragging on and it looks like the old games of the past, we all need to blow the whistle. We all need to expect better out of Washington, DC.
And we hear a lot of dialog on the Hill about the importance of national defense. If that's the case, give us a number—at the beginning of the process, not at the end of the process. Let us know what the defense—I think it's realistic to ask Congress to prioritize national defense and education. We've done so. The budget that Mitch Daniels outlined clearly shows that we've got the monies available for a good, strong national defense.
Members of both parties are saying, well, we need to spend more, this, that, and the other. And that's good. What I hope they do is, they decide that the budget I submitted or the request I submitted for '02 is the right number and that they let us know that that's the number they will fund early, so that we avoid a fight, because I will fight for education funding and a national defense funding that I think is at the appropriate level. But fight isn't the right word yet.
The President. No, she was branched out from day one, as you—David, I'm surprised you didn't know that we made her—from the minute I got sworn in, she was the head of domestic policy, which means on every issue that has been in the domestic scene, she has been very much involved, whether it be Medicare reform or—she's doing a great job. Margaret is a very smart woman. You bet, she was an education person in Texas. But I realized how brilliant a woman she is, and she can handle just about every task we give her. So she's doing a good job. I've got a good team.
But I can't tell you how proud I am of Laura. When I married her, she was a public school librarian. [Applause] There's always one in every crowd. [Laughter] But like that public school librarian, she not only loves books; she loves children. And one of the things she is going to work with me on is to make sure that every child— I mean every child—in America gets a firstrate education by starting with making sure every child in America learns to read.
There's a bill that passed the House; there's a bill that passed the Senate. When they get back, I hope they don't play politics with the education bill. They need to get it to my desk quickly, so I can sign it and reform the public schools all across America.
And guess which—guess what usually has been saved for the last? The defense bill, leaving our national security at the mercy of budget games and last-minute cuts. This year, we might even see our administration's two highest priorities, education and national defense, being played off against each other.
That's the old way of doing business, and it's time to stop it. We may have different agendas in Washington, but we all have the same basic obligations. We must start with the things that matter most to the future and security of our country. This time, and from this time forward, let us put education and national defense at the first of the line, not at the last.
The President. Well, first of all, there's a lot of money spent from the Federal level to help—to help with reeducation. And one of the programs that I just mentioned is the use of Federal monies to empower State Governments to provide opportunities for reeducation.
To answer your question, it's about to happen when the Congress passes the education reform bill and the education bill, the funding mechanism necessary for education. But education is a priority not only here, but as my good wife reminded everybody on the radio, it's got to be a priority around the world. There is no excuse for the Taliban Government to have treated women and young girls the way they have and not educated people.
Education is a domestic priority. No question about it, it's a domestic priority. And we're increasing education spending at the Federal Government to help local districts. But we also have got to remind people around the world, if we want peace in the world, other nations must do a better job of treating people with respect by making sure that they are educated, as well.
Speaking about education, you go to school, don't you? Let's hear your question.
Secondly—it goes to this lady's point right here—is to make sure that every child in America is well educated, starting with every child learning to read. There's nothing like an education to provide hope for people. Part of the reason why people are discouraged is because they lose hope. They say, "Well, this society isn't meant for me." A hopeful society is an educated society. And so we've got to make sure we get it right, we have an education— a focus on education, understanding that education is the gateway to such great freedom and opportunity.
As I listened to the concerns of these Americans, I hoped Congress was listening, too, because it became clear the American people want action on an agenda of economic growth, energy independence, patients' rights, education, faith-based legislation—all of which are important issues that are stuck in Congress.
Congress has other important business to finish before it goes home for the holidays. Education is vital to our country's future. We need a new emphasis on reading, higher standards, more flexibility, and greater local control. Congress has made great progress toward the most comprehensive education reform in a generation, so no child is left behind. But this important education reform is stuck in a conference committee. And the Patients' Bill of Rights passed by both Houses of Congress also remains unfinished. These are important measures. They have bipartisan support. They should be law. I am ready to sign them.
I'm worried that the attacks on 9/11 have affected the ability for people to find work, and we're going to do something about it. Not only are we going to make the homeland secure, but we've done some things in Washington that actually make sense. [Laughter] And one of them is to pass a good education bill that makes public education a priority, that sets high standards, that calls people into account if there's failure, and that trusts the local people to run their own schools.
Here are some practical steps to make sure that our economy recovers: good education—that will help in the long run, for certain; good tax policy; a good stimulus package; a good farm bill; good trade policy; and most importantly, homeland security that keeps Americans safe.
A second way to make sure we've got sustained economic growth is to make sure our public school system works well. Recently, last week, I had the honor of traveling the country touting the fact that I was able to sign a good education bill. I know I shocked people when I stood up and said, "Ted Kennedy is all right." [Laughter] Probably shocked him more than anybody else. [Laughter]
But we showed what can happen in Washington when you put party politics aside and focus on what's good for the country. And what's good for the country is to make sure our education system produces smart, intelligent, literate children. And this bill I signed goes a long way for helping. It's a great piece of legislation, and I want to thank both Republicans and Democrats for working with me to get an education bill that America can be proud of.
So those are some of the thoughts I wanted to share with you as I travel down the Mississippi River: Good stimulus policy, good economic policy based on trusting people with their own money, good education policy, good trade policy, and a good policy to bring these terrorists to justice.
The national security is more important than political party. And I appreciate the way Democrats and Republicans have worked together. Energy is more important than political party. Jobs are more important than political party. And we showed what's possible in Washington on the education bill. We passed a good piece of legislation that says, public education is a cornerstone of job security; it's a cornerstone of hope; and the Federal Government is going to take an active role in promoting accountability to make sure nobody gets left behind in America.
So there I was, a couple of weeks ago, traveling the country, saying, "You know, Ted Kennedy is a pretty good fellow." I know that sends a lot of shock waves throughout American political scene. [Laughter] It certainly shocked him. [Laughter] We worked together on the education bill. Instead of saying, "Well, I can't talk to you because you're of this party, and you can't talk to me because I'm that party," we said, "Why don't we do what's right for America when it comes to our children? Why don't we set aside all the bickering? It's time for us to understand in Washington that America is more important than our political parties and come together and do what's right for the American people."
At its core, an economic security plan for every American has got to be the goal of our Government, and it begins with a good education and ends with secure retirement. And in between, much of one's life depends on being able to find work, good, steady work. And that's how I approach decisions about our economy. I ask, are we creating an environment in which people can find work? My economic plan is summed up in one word: jobs. And that's what all of us in Washington ought to be asking: How do we create jobs for people who want to work in America?
So we've got to get it right when it comes to education. And I'm proud to report this is one issue where a handful of us in Washington decided to put aside our political parties and focus on what was right for America. I had the honor of signing a very good piece of education legislation sponsored by, of all people in the Senate, Ted Kennedy. Now look, I traveled the country saying the guy is not a bad guy. [Laughter] I think I put him in shock. [Laughter] I know I put the people in Crawford, Texas' coffee shop in shock. [Laughter] But on this issue we worked well together, Republicans and Democrats. We showed the country that party is all right—I'm a proud Republican—it's not nearly as important as the education of our children.
And that's not right in America. It is not right to quit on kids. And so now, as a result of this piece of legislation that both the Members here voted for, we asked— we say, "Look, if you get Federal money"— and we're going to spend money, by the way, on certain areas in education, out of the Federal Government—"but if you get it, you've got to show us whether or not the children can read and write and add and subtract."
But education doesn't just stop at the elementary school level or high school or college. This Nation has got to understand, as technology changes, we've got to make sure the workforce changes with it. And that's why I strongly support local job training programs.
We're increasing—significantly increasing the amount of job training in our—in the budget I submit to Congress. It recognizes there are a lot of good, hard-working people in America who received an education, that were skilled in one area, but the job base has shifted, and therefore, we better educate people to make sure that they can shift with the technologies. And as well, my 2003 budget increases funding for Job Corps, which is an effective program that will help disadvantaged young people learn how to work.
So one thing we can do to make sure that people find a job is to make sure our education system works well throughout its entirety. Another thing to make sure there's an opportunity to create more jobs is to have good tax policy that allows people to keep more money, more of their own money, that you can put more of your own money in your own pocket, and you can spend it.
And finally, we've got to make sure that we have retirement security, that if part of a secure economic environment begins with education, it's got to end with making sure that our Medicare system works well, that people are given options, that it's a modern system that reflects the modern ways of medicine, and that we have a Social Security system that fulfills the promise to the elderly but recognizes we better reform her for the younger workers so that they will have a Social Security system, one that says if you're relying upon Social Security today, nothing changes. The promise we have made you will be a promise this Government will keep.
The United States is also committed to playing a leading role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Today I announce the United States Overseas Private Investment Corporation will provide an additional $50 million line of credit for Afghanistan to finance private sector projects. This announcement builds on the United States' pledge in Tokyo earlier this month to provide $297 million this year to create jobs and to start rebuilding Afghanistan's agricultural sector, its health care system, and its educational system. Yet these efforts are only the beginning.
Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start. Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no child is left behind. I was proud to work with members of both parties: Chairman John Boehner and Congressman George Miller; Senator Judd Gregg. And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend Ted Kennedy. [Laughter] I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say such a thing— [laughter]—but our work on this bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on results.
And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part of the world. So we will renew the promise of the Peace Corps, double its volunteers over the next 5 years, and ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education and opportunity in the Islamic world.
I'm proud of the work we did on an education bill. I know a lot of you here are concerned about your public schools, and so am I. I want the best, and so do you. I want to make sure every child learns and no child gets left behind. We worked well together. I said last night in the middle of the speech that I was proud to work with Republicans, proud to work with Democrats. I was even proud of the efforts—very proud of the efforts of Ted Kennedy.
A good job means good education. A good education means good jobs. In order to have good jobs, you've got to have a good education system. And so, therefore, we passed a good piece of legislation—provides more money for at-risk kids but also trusts the good people of North Carolina to make the decisions for the children of North Carolina. The people who care more about the children who live in Winston-Salem are the moms and dads and community leaders of Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
People, though, come up to me all the time and say, "Well, gosh, that's good. We're winning." I say, "We are, and we've got a lot more to do, and it's going to take a while." They say, "What can I do to help?" You know, you've heard me talk about this, probably, but I really, truly view this as a conflict between good and evil. And there really isn't much middle ground—like none. [Laughter] The people we fight are evil people. They have no regard for human life. They believe in tyranny. Their history has shown exactly what I'm talking about. Imagine a society where women are brutalized, children aren't educated, young girls have no chance of getting an education. It is a backward, barbaric point of view. And those are the kind of people—but the people we're after embraced that point of view.
I want to thank other locally elected officials for being here, and I particularly want to thank a member of my Cabinet. This man is a man who understands public education. He understands it well. You see, I picked him out of the trenches. I didn't find somebody, somebody who can talk theory to be the Department of Education— head of the Department of Education. I found somebody who has practiced. And when I asked him to join my team, he was the superintendent of the Houston Independent School District, a school district that was committed to make sure there was excellence for every child, and no child—I mean no child—would be left behind. Please welcome the Secretary of Education, Rod Paige.
We are on our way, after this chance for me to tell you about how I think things are going, to Booker T. Washington High School to talk about the need for folks to teach. I'm going to spend a little time at the end of this talk, talking about that. But Rod is here to highlight our passion and focus on education.
You know, I was watching how Scott handled the budget issue here in Wisconsin. And he's handled it the way you'd want any leader to handle it: to stand up and make tough decisions, to not duck them. He proposed a budget that recognizes that when times are bad, you don't raise taxes on the working people; that if times are lean, you do what families do, you pare back a little bit. But he also set clear priorities. To me, the most important job of any Governor is to make sure the public school system of a State is sound and healthy, to make sure children from all walks of life get educated. And in the budget he proposed, public education is the number one priority for the citizens of Wisconsin.
I can't tell you how passionate I feel on the subject. I look around and see your children and your grandchildren. This is an opportunity to defend freedom for them. This is a chance to say that your kids can grow up in a secure and peaceful America, and if they work hard and get a good education, they can realize their dreams in a peaceful world. We long for peace, but we understand that the terrorists must be brought to justice in order to achieve that peace.
And for the good of a lot of people in North Carolina, in particular, the North Carolina farmers and ranchers, we put the death tax on its way to extinction. And you'll hear them screaming about the budget up there. But if they're worried about the budget, what they need to do is fund the priorities I've sent up there—national defense, homeland security, education—and then hold the line on spending everywhere else, and we'll be just fine.
And speaking about education, I'm proud that we passed a good bill, really good education bill. I know it shocked you, and I can guarantee it shocked the people in Crawford, Texas, to hear me say nice things about Ted Kennedy. [Laughter] He deserved nice things said about him in this case because he got the bill unstuck in the United States Senate. It is a bill which says the Republican Party understands that we've got to educate every child, that no child should be left behind, that we strongly believe in accountability in our public school systems, that we believe that poor children can read and write and add and subtract, that we insist that there be local control of schools, and we understand that reading is the new civil right for every child in America. This party now stands squarely with the children of America, to say that everybody ought to be educated, and we support our public schools, and we think they can do a better job, and the Federal role, while needed, is limited.
The record speaks for itself. It's a record of accomplishment. It's a record that understands the role of the private sector in the revitalization of community. But what I love is Norm's passion for education. I love a person who understands that the power of education can make America a much more hopeful place. I appreciate a man who stands tall for making sure every child is educated and no child is left behind. I hope the people of Minnesota, from all parties, understand what a good and decent, honorable man Norm Coleman is and to send him to the United States Senate.
I also want you to know we've got a lot of work to do at home. I was really proud earlier this year to travel the country touting the fact that I signed a significant piece of education legislation. It was a landmark piece of legislation. I don't remember the exact words I said when I spoke to the Hispanic Chamber in California in one of my first speeches, but I can assure you I talked about education because it is a passion of mine, and it was a passion of not only mine but of both Republicans and Democrats. I got a good bill on my desk because both people—leaders in both parties decided that there's something more important than political party in America, and that's the education of our children.
We worked together on a really good education bill. We had some photos taken earlier, and one lady came through, said she was a teacher. I want to tell her and I want to tell everybody else that education has got to be one of the top domestic priorities, regardless of political party. And as a result of working closely together, we passed a substantial piece of education reform.
It is really good legislation. It is one that sets high standards, that refuses to accept mediocrity for any child, that challenges a system that quits on children early and just moves them through. That's not going to happen in America anymore, as far as we're concerned. We say we'll fund education; we'll focus money on where the needs are most, particularly amongst poor—the poor. But we expect everybody to learn. Not only do we expect everybody to learn, we firmly believe everybody can learn.
President Toledo. This is an historic visit made by a friend representing a country with which we have had a historical relationship. It is not a merely diplomatic visit; it is an official working visit. And we have touched on substantive issues which range from the open struggle against poverty, a war without quarter against terrorism and drug trafficking. I repeat, a war with no ambiguities whatsoever, against terrorism and drug trafficking. We've touched on issues of trade, education, even the Peace Corps.
President Toledo and I believe that education is the key to participation in the global economy. The President's own path in life is a lesson in how education opens up doors to opportunity. He is passionate on the subject. I love his passion, and I appreciate his commitment. And I'm pleased to announce that our country will help establish an Andean Center of Excellence for Teacher Training, with a base here in Peru. The center will support President Toledo's goal of quality schools with quality teachers, that give more Peruvians the literacy and learning they need to succeed.
I think it's important because trade is a synonym for work, and work is a way to deal with poverty. Through work, education, and health, we can eradicate poverty. We are partners on the issue of trade, on the issue of drug trafficking and terrorism, in the defense of democracy and of human rights, my friend—human rights.
I repeat, if you'd like me to—go through the litany of things I just said: the Andean Trade Preference Act; the bilateral action on investment; money for education; money to fight drugs. We've tripled the amount of money—I believe it's from $50 million up to $195 million available. And so I think our commitment is—I think our commitment speaks for itself. And I appreciate so very much the chance to come and explain it to the Peruvian people—that ours is more than just words; ours is deeds and action.
I appreciate President Toledo's work to have a security arrangement in place in the neighborhood, amongst the countries bordering Peru, that will then allow him to reinvest in education. We talked about that.And I think that is a strong commitment and a wise commitment.
But we expect other nations to develop the habits that will lead to a better opportunity for their people: rule of law, a focus on education, and good health care. President Toledo understands that; he's been a leader in that effort. And I think what I said in Monterrey was very important, that unless we all focus on how programs benefit people directly, no matter what the efforts or strategy is, it's likely to lead to failure. But programs and policies that understand the worth of each human being, that each individual matters, are those programs which will be successful. And so our country will try to foster that. And this President has made that commitment, for which I am grateful.
I think that there is a major challenge in the world. In order to survive in this globalized and savagely competitive world we live in, we need to invest more in the minds of our people. Basically, what this means is investing more in nutrition, health, education, and justice for the poor. We won't be able to deal with the challenges of this globalized world unless we invest in the knowledge of our societies.
The question immediately arises, and obviously so, in an economy that is growing, that is overcoming a recession, where do you get the money to invest in nutrition, health, and education? Well, we've made an appeal to countries at the bilateral level. And there the United States has played a very generous role, at the donors table in Madrid. And I want to publicly express my appreciation, Mr. President. There has been debt conversion, external bilateral debt swap, for social investment. And there we have been able to get a commitment of about $1 billion. This is one way to establish a financial space to invest in health, nutrition, and education.
The other thing is that I believe it makes no sense in this world that as long as we have a country with 54 percent of Peruvians who live below the poverty line or 16 percent who live below the dire poverty line—when I was born, the very first minute of my life when I opened my eyes, I saw the face of dire poverty. I know what this means. That's why I am convinced that we can make an effort to reduce military spending, to reorient those resources towards investment in justice and education and health, because the defense of a country no longer depends on how many tanks or ships or aircraft we have. It's all about how strong our economy is, how educated our people are. And please excuse me for being so passionate on this subject, but there is absolutely no doubt on this. And the empirical evidence is very harsh with regard to the return on investment on education and health and nutrition for our people.
And here, once again, we have another point of coincidence that leads us down the same path together. I conveyed something that's very close to my heart, with regard to the Huascaran education program, and I asked our friend to support us on this. And I will be going to New York, and I'm going to talk to Mr. Bill Gates to try to promote the Huascaran project even more. But if we reduce military spending, we're going to have some financial leeway to reorient this money towards the poor, who want to overcome poverty, who want freedom. And we'll be able to deal with the challenges of the future even better.
He also has been a leader on education reform. For too long, our party was identified as being antischool, that we weren't for educating children. That's changed. I had the honor of signing a piece of legislation which recognizes the importance of education in our society; refuses to allow for mediocrity; challenges the status quo when children are simply shuffled through the system, regardless of whether they can read or not; insists that every child—I mean every child—can read in America.
And Lindsey Graham stood by my side on this important piece of education reform. And not only that, he's sponsoring a piece of legislation, which I strongly support, that will forgive loans to teachers who teach in the neediest areas in America. He's a reformer when it comes to education, and the South Carolinians ought to be proud of his record.
I gave a speech the other day on the importance of making sure that children learn how to read early in life, so that when they start kindergarten, there's not this huge learning gap that takes place in America. Johnny figured that out way before my speech. He figured out preschool education was important before a lot of other people knew it was important. And I appreciate Johnny's efforts on focusing the State of Connecticut and his budget on preschool programs as well as spending billions of dollars to make sure class sizes are smaller in the State of Connecticut.
Listen, we passed historic education reform in Washington, DC. And thanks to the Members on the stage and both Republicans and Democrats working together, finally, in Washington, we were able to pass a meaningful piece of legislation, part of which is to not only hold people to high standards and to expect the best out of every child, but part of it is we're going to trust the Governors and local people to figure out the path to excellence. And it gives me great confidence in supporting such a bill, knowing that Johnny Rowland is the Governor of the State of Connecticut.
I have mentioned a couple of the issues that we've worked on, education and tax relief. But there's a lot to do in Washington. We need an energy policy, an energy policy on the one hand that enhances conservation, that unleashes the technology of the country to enable our cars to run cleaner, our plants to burn cleaner. But we need to explore more, too. We need to be less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. This was made pretty clear the other day when Saddam Hussein stands up and announces he's going to try to organize an oil boycott. You know my opinion about Saddam. [Laughter] The world's not going to follow him. But it just goes to show how important it is to diversify our supply away from places like Iraq.
The good news is, is that tax relief is continuing—this wasn't a one-time event; that there is more tax relief coming, and if you file out your forms—and I kind of suggest you do here, pretty quick—[laughter]—that you'll see the child credit was increased to $600 and made available to more lower income Americans. For a single mom with two children, making $18,000 a year, this one change alone provides $800 of tax relief. This year we're beginning a new 10 percent bracket. We've lowered the bracket. We're making it easier for low-income workers to stay—take their first steps up the ladder of opportunity. Starting this year, you'll be able to save more of your own money, tax free, through education savings accounts, IRA, or 401(k). And I hope you take advantage of it. Saving is good for your families, and savings are important for your future.
In order to make sure the job base remains strong, we've got to make sure our folks are educated. A good education system will mean that people are going to be able to find good work in America. And one of the things we did—it was Republicans and Democrats, I might want to remind you—came together and said, public education ought to be a top domestic priority. We passed historic reforms which sets high standards and, at the same time, trust the Governors and local folks to manage the path for excellence. The people who care more about the Iowa children when it comes to education, are Iowans, not people in Washington, DC.
I appreciate so very much Bill's emphasis on education. As he mentioned, we just passed historic reform in Washington, DC. Let me tell you what the bill says. It says we believe every child can learn in America, and therefore, we expect high standards for every single child. The bill says that we trust the local people to make the right decisions for the children of California or Texas or any other State in the Union. The bill says that when we spend money, we expect results. And the bill says that when we confront—when we find failure, we must be courageous enough to confront it, for no child should be trapped in a school that refuses to teach and a school that refuses to change.
She told me that the day I signed the no-child-left-behind legislation, which was a significant piece of educational reform, supported both by Heather and by Pete, that she went back to Griegos. And it was a fitting place for her to go, because this is a piece of legislation which says that America will refuse to condemn any child to failure. It is a piece of public—legislation that says to our public schools, we'll set high standards for every child—I mean every child—that we trust the local people to chart the path to excellence, and that we refuse to accept a system that simply shuffles children through. And the beneficiaries of this type of mentality are going to be the children who go to Griegos, and Heather knows that. And I want to thank you for your strong support on education reform. It means so much to this part of the world, to all our country that we got this legislation done.
Many of you have gotten to know Laura. What you didn't know is that when I asked her to marry me, she was a—didn't care for politics, didn't care for politicians. And here she is as the First Lady of the United States—thank goodness. She's doing a fabulous job. I'm really proud of her, and I love her dearly. Today she couldn't be with me here in California because she's in Arkansas, talking about the need to make sure that we have early childhood education in every neighborhood, in every State, all across the country.
I appreciate so very much Bill's emphasis on issues that matter to everybody, starting with education. I gave a speech a little earlier here in the Silicon Valley, and I talked about the hope and promise of public education. It is so important that we get our public education right in America. The public education system in America is one of the most important foundations of our democracy. After all, it is where children from all over America learn to be responsible citizens and learn to have the skills necessary to take advantage of our fantastic, opportunistic society. And yet, we have failed in our public school system for too many children.
As Bill mentioned, I had the honor of signing historic education reform that set high standards for every child in America, not just a few, not just people from suburban California or suburban Texas, but every single child. We believe every child can learn in America. And in that bill we incorporate a uniquely Republican principle that says, we trust the local people to chart the path for excellence for the citizens and children of California. I understand and Bill understands, all wisdom does not reside in Washington, DC, that if you're interested in achieving educational excellence, we've got to trust the people of California to chart the path for educational excellence. That's why it's important this man become your Governor.
Milton Friedman has also shown us how freedom can foster educational reform. For many years, he has been a tireless advocate of school choice as a way of empowering parents and improving the performance of our schools. Educational reform advances when parents have the information and the authority to push for reform. And there is no greater authority than a good alternative. Poor children in America need better options when they're trapped in schools that will not teach and will not change.
What is an accurate reflection of my opinion is that Mr. Arafat has let the Palestinian people down. He hasn't led. And as a result, the Palestinians suffer, and my heart breaks for the Palestinian moms and dads who wonder whether or not their children are going to be able to get a good education and whether or not there's going to be a job available for their children.
I want to thank Tim and all the folks who organized this event. I want to thank you all for coming to help—to help Bob. You know, when you find a good, honest, decent, honorable person in politics, you need to back him, and this guy is just that. Plus, he's got a great record. He has his priorities straight. His most fundamental priority is to make sure that every child in the State of Ohio gets a good education, and the record is impressive. The record is impressive. Not only has he focused on making the Ohio schools a funding priority; he's focused on insisting that there be excellence in every single schoolroom in Ohio. I appreciate your—Bob, I appreciate your leadership. The people of Ohio have got to understand that he has led on this issue.
And not only that, he and Hope understand that if a child cannot read, a child cannot learn. And it's important to have a Governor set a priority. Not only is public schools a priority, public education a priority, but teaching every child to read is the first priority of making sure there's excellence in every public school in the State of Ohio.
We have just passed historic reform in Washington, DC, education reform. It may be hard for you to believe, but there are, at moments, when Republicans and Democrats come together for the good of the Nation. And this is one of the cases. People from both parties came together and worked on education reform which says that we believe every child can learn in America, not some, not a few, but every child. We set the highest of high standards.
Tommy Thompson was a Governor, a friend of Mike and mine, Governor of Wisconsin, and did a terrific job of heralding education reforms and welfare reforms in his State. So I figured if a person could do a good job of helping people find work in Wisconsin, why not bring him to the Federal level? Not only is he successful as a Governor, but he also understands that Governors need flexibility and authority in order to meet the goals that we all want. And so Tommy is a person who trusts the people of Arkansas to figure out the best way to take care of the people of Arkansas. And he's doing a great job as the Secretary of Health and Human Services. So I appreciate you being here, Tommy.
Now, I recognize some people need extra help. There needs to be some extra education or some extra job training, and so part of the 40-hour workweek can go to job training. As a matter of fact, 16 hours of the 40, if need be, should be set aside for job training or education purposes. And that's in the bill I've submitted and passed the House of Representatives.
And finally, it's very important that we give States maximum flexibility. The problem with Washington is, oftentimes Washington thinks on behalf of people just because some in Washington think that the only place where smart people live is in Washington. That's not really the case. [Laughter] There's a couple smart ones up there, but not all the brains in America are in Washington, DC. Therefore, we ought to trust the local folks. We ought to trust the Governors more. As a former Governor—and Tommy's a former Governor—we understand that the more flexibility in the welfare law or the education law, for that matter, the more likely it is we're going to achieve important social goals and social objectives.
So the bill is comprehensive in that sense, and it's all aimed at helping people—it's—that and this education reform. Listen, I want your kids to go to college, and I want your kids to get the best education possible. And we've passed a pretty good bill out of Washington. It really does empower the State of Arkansas more than ever before. And it says, every child can learn. I mean, it starts with this premise, every child—it doesn't matter how your children are raised, what the mom does for a living—every child can learn.
It also sets high standards. And see, I'm the kind of fellow who believes in raising that bar. I believe in the best. I don't want mediocrity. I want excellence in everything we do. And so I'm confident that the bill that is being debated up there now, combined with the education bill, it's really going to make America a much more hopeful place for every single citizen, not just a few of us, not just a group of us, but every citizen. And that's really what we're aiming for.
One of the things I spent a lot of time listening about was education. And many of you all have been very much involved in education reform, and I want to thank you for that. And the bill we passed is a good bill. It really is, because it sets high standards. It refuses to accept the fact that—we challenge the idea that certain kids can't learn—let me just put it to you that way.
The bill also passes power out of Washington. It really does a pretty darn good job of aligning authority and responsibility at local levels. So I'm proud of the piece of legislation, and we'll continue to stay focused on education.
I appreciate Rick's record. I want to talk a little bit about education. It is a passion of mine, and it's a passion of Rick's. It is absolutely essential that at all levels of government we have people who are willing to raise standards for every child. It is absolutely essential for the good of the State of Texas that we have a Governor who believes every child can learn, somebody who doesn't lower the bar. See, if you lower the standards, if you expect mediocrity, you'll get mediocrity, and that's not good enough for the State of Texas.
As Rick mentioned, we reformed the education code out of the Federal Government. It mirrors what Rick is doing here in Texas. Let me explain it to you right quick. It says that if you receive money from the taxpayers, you've got to measure. If you get help from the Federal Government or the State Government, you've got to show the taxpayers but more importantly the parents whether or not the children all across the State of Texas are learning. And if they're learning, we'll praise the teachers. If they're meeting standards, if they're meeting expectations, there will be all kinds of praise for the hard-working teachers all across the country and in the State of Texas.
Part of economic security is to make sure everybody gets a good education in America. I appreciate Senator—Congressman John Boehner's leadership as chairman of the Education Committee and want you to know that by working together, we passed an education bill that sets high standards for every child in America. You see, we believe that if you lower the bar, you get low standards and bad results. We believe every child can learn. But we, for the first time, said that if you receive Federal money, if you take taxpayers' money, you must show us whether or not children are learning to read and write and add and subtract. And if they are, we will praise you, but if not, you better change on behalf of the American people.
The other thing I like about Doug is, his vision for a better union means more skills for those who are members of the union. You see, Doug understands that through education and training, you can enhance a man's or a woman's skills. And that enables that person to more better realize their dreams. He understands the vision of a union is not only to work for jobs but to enhance the ability of members within the union to improve their lives. And I appreciate that vision of putting union members first. Doug, you're a good leader. You're a good leader.
