We will confront the hard issues, threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security, before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
We will confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security -- before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
The single most important item of unfinished business on Capitol Hill is to create a unified Department of Homeland Security that will vastly improve our ability to protect our coasts and our borders and our communities. The election may be over, but a terrorist threat is still real. The Senate must pass a bill that will strengthen our ability to protect the American people. And they must pass a bill that preserves the authority every President since John Kennedy has had to act in the interest of national security. It's imperative that the Congress send me a bill that I can sign before the 107th Congress ends.
The President. Yes. It is important for me to protect national security. You're talking about the Presidential daily brief. It's important for the writers of the Presidential daily brief to feel comfortable that the documents will never be politicized and/or unnecessarily exposed for public purview. I— and so therefore, the kind of the first statements out of this administration were very protective of the Presidential prerogatives of the past and to protect the right for other Presidents, future Presidents, to have a good Presidential daily brief.
In order to make sure America is a good place to invest so people can find work, we need to pass sound energy legislation. I submitted a bill to the United States Congress 2 years ago. They need to get the bill to my desk. It's a bill that will modernize our electricity system. It is a bill that will encourage conservation. It is a bill that encourages alternative sources of energy. But it is also a bill that recognizes we can explore for coal and natural gas in environmentally friendly ways. For the sake of economic security and national security, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of oil.
America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. We have built strong coalitions to make the world a safer place. We've got over 60 nations in the Proliferation Security Initiative; nearly 40 nations are in Afghanistan; more than 30 countries are in Iraq. As your President, I will continue to build our alliances and work with our friends in the cause of peace and freedom and security. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
To make sure people can find work, to make sure this is the most competitive place in the world to do business, Congress needs to pass my energy plan. Listen, I understand we need to modernize our electricity grid, and we've got a plan to do so. We will encourage more conservation. We will spend research and development monies on how to grow our way out of independence. Listen, I want to be the President who says, "The corn crop is up, and we're less dependent on foreign sources of energy." But for the sake of economic security, we need to be developing our own resources in an environmentally friendly way. For the sake of national security, we must be less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. We have a strong coalition to help us defeat the terrorists: 60 nations in the Proliferation Security Initiative; nearly 40 nations in Afghanistan; we have more than 30 countries with us in Iraq. We will continue to build our alliances and work with our friends in the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other foreign countries.
America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. And we've got others to help us. We've got a vast coalition of nations working together, and that's good. There are over 60 nations involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative. Nearly 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan. More than 30 nations are involved in Iraq. I'll continue to work to build alliances and to work with our friends for the cause of security and peace, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
We need an energy plan. If we want to have jobs here, you know, we've got to have energy. And right now, we're too dependent on foreign sources of energy. That's just the way it is. I submitted an energy plan to the United States Congress over 2 years ago. It was a plan that said we've got to diversify our energy supply, but we've got to be—and we've got to be wise about how we use the energy we have. We need clean coal technology to make sure we can use precious coal. We can explore in environmentally friendly ways. We need alternative sources of energy like ethanol and biodiesel. We need to be better at conservation. We need to promote technologies which change habits and uses, like hydrogen-driven automobiles. But for the sake of economic security and for the sake of national security, I need an energy plan on my desk to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
We put together a vast coalition, nearly 40 countries in Afghanistan and nearly 30 in Iraq. And it's important we work with others in this war on terror because you've got to share intelligence, and you've got to work to cut off money. And when we find a threat, it's important to be able to pick up the phone and call a friend like Great Britain and say, "Pick this person up, please," because—"and here's the evidence." In other words, there's got to be a collaborative effort. And we are. And we're working closely with countries around the world. I'll continue to work on this coalition when I'm your President for 4 more years. But I will never turn over our security—national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
My opponent, the Senator, talks about foreign policy. In our first debate, he proposed America pass a "global test." In order to defend ourselves, we have to get international approval. That's one of the major differences we have about defending our country. I work with allies. I work with friends. We'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries. We'll be resolute. We'll be strong, and we will wage a comprehensive war against the terrorists.
The President. The truth is, we should never turn America's national security decisions over to international bodies or leaders of other countries.
Once again, last night, with a straight face, the Senator said—well, shall we say, refined his answer on his proposed "global test." That's the test he would administer before defending America. After trying to say it really wasn't a test at all, last night he once again defended his approach, saying, "I think it makes sense." [Laughter] The Senator now says we'd have to pass some international truth standard. The truth is we should never turn America's national security decisions over to international bodies or leaders of other countries.
The President. After trying to say it wasn't really a test at all, last night he once again defended his approach, saying, "I think it makes sense." [Laughter] The Senator now says we have to pass some international truth standard. Those are his words. The truth is, we should never turn over America's national security decisions to international bodies or leaders of other countries.
We'll continue to build strong alliances. I talked with Tony Blair today, on Air Force One. He's a great ally. And we'll build on those alliances, and we'll strengthen our coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. And that makes America more dangerous. It makes the world less secure. I'll work with our allies. I'll build coalitions. But I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Listen, I'll continue to work to build strong alliances to keep our coalition strong. I talked to Prime Minister Tony Blair yesterday on Air Force One as I was heading from Iowa to Wisconsin. Alliances are important. Friendships are important in this dangerous world. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
We will continue to build strong alliances. We'll continue to work to strengthen our coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
See, we'll continue to build strong alliances. We'll work with friends. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. If that didn't pass a "global test," nothing will pass a "global test." Listen, I'll continue to build strong alliances. We'll work with our friends and allies. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
This morning in the Oval Office, I met with our fine Vice President, Dick Cheney. I was there, of course, to discuss national security matters before we hit the campaign trail today. I'm proud of my Vice President. I admit to you, he does not have the waviest hair in the race. [Laughter] You'll be happy I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. [Laughter] I picked him because of his judgment, his experience, and his ability to get the job done.
Senator Kerry's view of alliance-building is to call them "the coerced and the bribed," is to insult the friends who stands with us and try to placate countries who disagree with us. No, we'll work hard with all our friends and allies, but I will never give a country a veto power over our national security.
The President. I'm not making that up. He was standing right there when he said it. No, we'll work with our friends and allies. I'll continue to build alliances and strong coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. He was standing right there when he said it. No, we'll work with friends and allies, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. He was standing right there when he said it. I work with our friends and allies. We will strengthen our coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. He was standing about that far away from me when he said it. I'll work with our friends and allies. We'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. I heard him. He was standing right there when he said it. I will work with our friends and allies, but I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. He was standing right about right there. Listen, I'll work with our friends and allies. We'll continue to build strong coalitions to keep us secure. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
Yet, my opponent's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
My opponent's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The security of our families is vital, and it's important to our people of this country to understand the records. Senator Kerry's record on national security has the far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. The security of our families is very important. And my opponent's record on national security has far deeper problems with just election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. He has a record. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less secure. Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
Now, you have to wonder why the Senator has taken such different positions at different places and different times in this campaign. Well, let me give you two reasons. It's important for the people of Ohio to understand this. Senator Kerry changes positions because he's willing to say anything he thinks that will help him politically at the time. And he does so to try to obscure a 20-year trail of out-of-the-mainstream votes that leads to an inescapable conclusion: Senator Kerry has been on the wrong side of the defining national security and domestic policy debates of the last 2 years. He can run, but he cannot hide.
There's another reason the Senator changes positions. He doesn't want you to know where he stands. He has a history. He doesn't want you to know where he really stands on national security because he has a record of weakness. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry proposed cancellation of critical defense weapons systems and said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
You have to wonder why he's taken such dramatically different positions in different places in different times in this campaign. Well, here's two reasons why, and it's important for the Ohio voters to understand this. Senator Kerry changes positions because he's willing to say anything he thinks will help him politically at the time. And he does so to try to obscure a 20-year record of out-of-the-mainstream votes that leads to this conclusion: Senator Kerry has been on the wrong side of defining national security and domestic policy debates for the last two decades. That is his record. He can run, but he cannot hide.
And there's another reason why the Senator changes positions. He doesn't want you to know where he really stands. He doesn't want you to know where he stands on national security because he has a record of weakness. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong, and President Ronald Reagan was right.
You have to wonder why my opponent has taken such different positions at different places and different times in this campaign. I think you'll find two reasons why. Senator Kerry changes positions because he's willing to say anything he thinks will help him politically at the time. And he does so to try to obscure a 20-year record, 20 years of out-of-the-mainstream votes. That leads to an inescapable conclusion. Senator Kerry has been wrong—on the wrong side of the defining national security and domestic policy debates for the last two decades. He can run from his record, but he cannot hide.
And there's another reason the Senator changes positions. He doesn't want you to know where he really stands. [Laughter] He doesn't want you to know where he stands on national security, because he has a record of weakness. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry proposed cancellation of critical defense weapons systems and said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
The next 4 years, I will work with our friends and allies. We will strengthen our coalition, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] He was standing about three yards away when he said it. I couldn't believe it either. As far as I tell, that means our country must get permission before we act in our own defense. As President, I'll build on alliances. We'll continue to work with our friends and allies, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] I heard it. [Laughter] As far as I can tell, that means our country must get permission before we act in our own defense. As President, I'll always work with friends and allies. I'll always build coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. He voted against many of the weapons systems critical to our defense buildup to help us keep the peace. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. Listen, I'll always work with our friends and allies. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
My opponent's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. And it's important for you to understand the record. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Reagan was right.
The President. That is a dangerous policy in the world in which we live. I'll work with our friends. I will work with our allies. I understand how important these alliances are, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The American people have been watching this election carefully, and they noticed my opponent's positions are kind of like the weather here in Minnesota. If you don't like it, wait a little bit, and it will change. [Laughter] He was for the war and against the war, for the war and against the war. But his record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong.
The President. As you can tell, that's kind of how I felt too. [Laughter] As far as I can tell, that means our country must get permission from foreign capitals before we act in our own defense. I'll work with our allies, and I'll work with our friends. I believe in building coalitions, and we have done just that. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
His record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flops. One of the largest national security issues of our time—on the largest national issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe. Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Reagan was right.
The President. I'm not making that up. He said it in a debate. I was surprised, like you were. [Laughter] As far as I can tell, it means our country must get permission from foreign capitals before we act in our own defense. I will work with our allies. I will strengthen our alliances. I will work with our friends, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has a far deeper problem than election-year flip-flopping. On the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. When Ronald Reagan was confronting the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war, Senator Kerry said that President Reagan's policy of peace through strength was making America less safe.
The President. I know, you're probably thinking I made that up, but I was standing right there pretty close to him when he said it. [Laughter] I was just as startled as you are. As far as I can tell, it means our country must get permission from foreign capitals before we act. As President, I will work with our friends. I will strengthen our alliances. But I will never turn over national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The problems with—the problem with my opponent's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed President Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. I'm not making that up. I heard him loud and clear. As far as I can tell, that means America must submit to the will of others before we defend ourselves. Listen, I'll work to build alliances. I will strengthen our coalitions. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Yet, the problems with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapon systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. I'll build on our alliances. I will work with our friends and allies to protect ourselves and to protect freedom. But I will never submit America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. It sounds familiar, doesn't it? He doesn't change positions only on national security issues. [Laughter] He also tries to scare seniors about their Social Security. But he forgets to mention that he is the one who voted eight times to raise taxes on Social Security benefits.
The President. The problem with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year flip-flops. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against crucial weapons systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History——
The President. I'm not making that up. I heard him. So did you. We'll work with our friends and allies, but I will never, ever turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. The problems of Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. Some of you probably think I'm making that up. I heard him. He was standing right there. You see, to me that means that we've got to get permission before we get troops. I'll work with our allies. I'll continue to build alliances. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
Senator Kerry's record on national security has far deeper problems than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war—I want the citizens of this—of western Pennsylvania to hear the truth here—during the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength.
The President. I will always work with our friends and allies, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The problem with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. Twenty years—for 20 years, on the largest national security issues of the time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry was critical, was against President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. Well, history has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
During our debates, it became clear we have a different attitude about how to protect American families. He said America must pass a "global test" before we commit force. I'm not making that up. I heard it, and so did you. As far as I can tell, a "global test" means that America must get permission to defend ourselves. I will build on our alliance. I will strengthen our relationships overseas, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
It is important for our fellow citizens to know the facts. See, the problems with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues, he's been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] I heard him say it—[laughter]— in the debate. As far as I can tell, my opponent's "global test" means that America must get permission in order to defend ourselves. I will work with our allies, and I will strengthen our alliances, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] He actually said that. I was standing pretty close to him when he did. [Laughter] As far as I can tell, that "global test" means that America must get permission before we defend ourselves. Listen, I'll work with our allies. I will strengthen our alliances. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The problem with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] I heard it during one of the debates. As far as I can tell, my opponent's "global test" means America must get permission to defend our country. I'll work with allies and I'll work with our friends, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
The problems with Senator Kerry's record on national security are deeper than election-year reversals. For 20 years, on the largest national security issues of our time, he has been consistently wrong. During the cold war, Senator Kerry voted against critical weapons systems and opposed President Ronald Reagan's policy of peace through strength. History has shown that Senator Kerry was wrong and President Ronald Reagan was right.
The President. I'm not making that up. [Laughter] He was standing right about there when he said it. [Laughter] As far as I can tell, that means that America must get permission from foreign capitals. I will work on alliances. I will continue to strengthen our friendships around the world. But I will never, never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
See, we got to diversify away from fossil fuels. We're hooked on oil from the Middle East which is a national security problem and an economic security problem and, at the same time, burning fossil fuels is a part of the cause of greenhouse gases.
Listen, the United States, for national security reasons and economic security reasons, needs to diversify away from fossil fuels. And so we've put out a strategy to do just that, and I can't wait to share with our G-8 friends, just like I shared with the Prime Minister, our strategy. We spent about over $20 billion last year on research and development on new technologies that we are willing to share with the world.
In order for us to be competitive and lead in the world, we've got to get off of Middle Eastern oil. I know it shocks some of you to hear a Texan say, "We're addicted to oil." And we are, and it's a problem. It's a problem. It's a national security problem, and it's an economic security problem to be reliant upon oil from parts of the world that may be unstable or parts of the world that simply don't like us. And so the best way to deal with that is to continue to foster new technologies because of research and development that will enable us to use different fuels in our cars, for example.
We intend to shape the future by encouraging research and development so this country remains the leading exporter and developer of new technologies. We're going to shape the future by changing our energy habits. I understand when an oil guy—I'm a guy from Texas—stands up and says, "We're addicted to oil," it caused people to take a second look. But I'm going to tell you something: Being addicted to oil puts us in an economic bind as well as a national security bind. And I intend to do something about it.
We're on our way for breakthroughs for automobiles that will be able to drive the first 40 miles on electricity without using a drop of gasoline. The party of Lincoln has been active about spending your money on research and development to find new ways to power automobiles, to find better ways to burn coal, to be able to use solar energy. My point to you is we understand, as a Republican Party, that it's in our economic interests, in our national interests, national security interests, to get off our addiction to foreign oil.
We've also applied our philosophy to issues of national security. Six-and-a-half years ago, our country faced the worst attack in our history. I understood immediately that we would have to act boldly to protect the American people. So we've gone on the offense against these extremists. We're staying on the offense, and we will not relent until we bring them to justice. We recognized that this is a war, not just a matter of law enforcement. We recognize that we're engaged in the decisive ideological struggle of our time.
Sometimes issues are easy to resolve, where the national security adviser and the domestic policy adviser could come in and say, "We've discussed the issue internally, Mr. President, and we all agree." But in matters of war, for example, there's difference of opinions, the surge, for example. There was a lot of different opinions on the surge. And that's the way it should be. People say, "Well, do you ever hear any other voices other than, like, a few people?" Of course I do. And I have enjoyed listening to the debates among people I work with. And I also like the idea of people being able to walk into the Oval Office and said, "Have you thought of this?" Or, "The debate is headed this way; I'd like you to consider this."
As the Secretary mentioned, I'm focusing this week on America's national security. And few are more important to that mission than the people of the State Department, both Foreign Service and civil service. Our gathering here will be seen by some 10,000 State Department personnel in the Washington area. It will be seen by 37,000 committed men and women, including many Foreign Service national employees in 250 posts all over the world.
I have also reserved the option of trial by military commission for foreign terrorists who wage war against our country. Noncitizens, non-U.S. citizens who plan and/or commit mass murder are more than criminal suspects. They are unlawful combatants who seek to destroy our country and our way of life. And if I determine that it is in the national security interest of our great land to try by military commission those who make war on America, then we will do so. We will act with fairness, and we will deliver justice, which is far more than the terrorists ever grant to their innocent victims.
Now, I want you to remember that we are at war. The United States of America is under attack. And at war, the President needs to have the capacity to protect the national security interests and the safety of the American people. And so I asked, what are all my options as your Commander in Chief? What are the options to protect America? What do I need to know about what might occur to make sure that I can come in front of the folks in Orlando, Florida, and say we're doing everything in our power, or we have every option in our power to keep you safe?
In a court of law, there would be all kinds of questions that might compromise our ability to gather incredibly important intelligence to prevent the next attack from happening to America. It seems like to me that the President of the United States ought to have the option to protect the national security interests of the country and, therefore, protect America from further attack.
And so, my hope is, is that those nations we put on notice and other nations around the world will make the right choice. But they should not make any mistake about it: We will defend our national security. The security of the United States of America is my most important job. And I take it seriously, and I will follow through.
I appreciate being with people who love the land and appreciate open space. I realize there's nobody more central to the American experience than the cowboy. But cattle raising is not only a big part of America's past; I view it as an incredibly important part of America's future. This Nation has got to eat. [Laughter] It's in our national security interests that we be able to feed ourselves. Thank goodness we don't have to rely on somebody else's meat to make sure our people are healthy and well fed.
We've got a lot of work to do in Washington, DC, and I appreciate these House Members' support. But there's no greater work to be done than to protect the American people. I have submitted a budget that prioritizes homeland defense and our national security. I submitted a budget that recognizes that we've got to prepare America for whatever emergency may come, a budget that puts ample amount of money in place to enable our first-responders, our brave police and firefighters and EMS crews all around the country, to have the equipment and training necessary to respond should the enemy hit us again.
Dr. Teller contributed to the success of that mission and helped us to meet other great national security challenges during the cold war. In recent decades, he has turned his efforts to the great scientific and moral task of building a defense against ballistic missiles. For a long life of brilliant achievement and patriotic service, America is in debt to Dr. Edward Teller.
Earlier this year, I proposed Project Bio-Shield which will speed the development of new vaccines and treatments for biological agents that could be used in a terrorist attack. The Senate needs to act on this important measure. The House has acted, and I appreciate their action. For the sake of national security, the Senate needs to pass Project BioShield.
Tonight I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect our values and benefit our economy. I propose a new temporary-worker program to match willing foreign workers with willing employers when no Americans can be found to fill the job. This reform will be good for our economy because employers will find needed workers in an honest and orderly system. A temporary-worker program will help protect our homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to focus on true threats to our national security.
On national security, Americans have the clearest possible choice. Our opponents say they approve of bold action in the world but only if no other government disagrees. I'm all for united action, and so are the 34 coalition partners we have in Iraq right now. But America must never outsource America's national security decisions to the leaders of other governments.
On national security, Americans have the clearest possible choice. Opponents say they approve of bold action in the world, but only if no other government disagrees. I'm all for united action, and so are the 34 coalition partners we have in Iraq right now. Yet America must never outsource America's national security decision to leaders of other governments.
On national security, Americans have the clearest possible choice. My opponent says he approves of bold action in the world but only if other countries do not object. I'm all for united action, and so are the 34 coalition partners in Iraq right now. Yet America must never outsource America's national security decision to the leaders of other countries.
First, before September the 11th, law enforcement, intelligence, and national security officials were prevented by legal and bureaucratic restrictions from sharing critical information with each other and with State and local police departments. We had—one group of the FBI knows something, but they couldn't talk to the other group in the FBI because of law and bureaucratic interpretation. You cannot fight the war on terror unless all bodies of your government at the Federal, State, and local level are capable of sharing intelligence on a real-time basis. We could not get a complete picture of terrorist threats, therefore. People had—different people had a piece of the puzzle, but because of law, they couldn't get all the pieces in the same place.
America is leading the world with confidence and moral clarity. And we've got others to help us. We've got a vast coalition of nations working together, and that's good. There are over 60 nations involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative. Nearly 40 nations are involved in Afghanistan. More than 30 nations are involved in Iraq. I'll continue to work to build alliances and to work with our friends for the cause of security and peace, but I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
And when it comes to national security, thankfully I've had a good team. We've had some big challenges in this country. And I've got a strong foreign policy, because the architects of that policy are people like Condi Rice and Colin Powell. These are good people. I've seen them under incredible pressure. I know their steadiness and their clear vision.
America will continue to lead the world with confidence and moral clarity. We put together a strong coalition to help us. There are nearly 40 nations involved in Afghanistan and some 30 nations involved in Iraq. Over the next 4 years, we'll continue to build on our alliances and work with our friends for the cause of security and peace. But I will never turn over America's national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
My opponent, the Senator, talks about foreign policy. In our first debate, he proposed America pass a "global test." In order to defend ourselves, we have to get international approval. That's one of the major differences we have about defending our country. I work with allies. I work with friends. We'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries. We'll be resolute. We'll be strong, and we will wage a comprehensive war against the terrorists.
September the 11th also changed the way we should look at national security, but not everyone realizes it. The choice we face in this election, the first Presidential election since September the 11th, is how our Nation will defeat this threat. Will we stay on the offensive against those who want to attack us——
I believe in strong alliances. I believe in respecting other countries and working with them and seeking their advice. But I will never submit our national security decisions to a veto of a foreign government.
In all these areas, my opponent's views would make America less secure and the world more dangerous. And none of these positions should come as a surprise. Over a 20-year career in the United States Senate, Senator Kerry has been consistently wrong on the major national security issues facing our country. The Senator who voted against the $87 billion for our troops in Afghanistan and Iraq is the same Senator who has voted against vital weapons systems during his entire career. He tried to cancel the Patriot missile, which shot down Scud missiles in Operation Desert Storm. He opposed the B-1 bomber, which was critical to victory in the Afghan campaign. He opposed the B-2 stealth bomber, which delivered devastating air strikes on Taliban positions. He opposed the modernized F-14D, which we used against terrorists in Tora Bora. He opposed the Apache helicopter, which destroyed enemy tanks and anti-aircraft missile launchers in Iraq.
The Senator's long record shows a clear pattern on national security. He has consistently opposed a stronger military. He has consistently looked for excuses to constrain American power. He has consistently shown poor judgment on the great issues of war and peace. When one Senator among a hundred holds a policy of weakness, it doesn't make a lot of difference. But the Presidency is an office of great responsibility and consequence.
The President. Which is a national security concern.
In the meantime, we've also got to make sure that we're less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. The lack of an energy policy and national security concerns go hand-in-hand. And I'm very aware of that, sir.
For almost 100 years, this campus has served as one of our country's premier centers for learning and thinking about America's national security. Some of America's finest soldiers have studied here—Dwight Eisenhower and Colin Powell. Some of America's finest statesmen have taught here—George Kennan.
Today, you're carrying on this proud tradition forward, continuing to train tomorrow's generals, admirals, and other national security thinkers, and continuing to provide the intellectual capital for our Nation's strategic vision.
I am committed to achieving a credible deterrent with the lowest possible number of nuclear weapons consistent with our national security needs, including our obligations to our allies. My goal is to move quickly to reduce nuclear forces. The United States will lead by example to achieve our interests and the interests for peace in the world.
President Putin. Now, as far as the issue of antimissile defense, the official position of the Russian Government is known. I don't think we need to spend time to, yet again, declare it. We proceed from the idea that the 1972 ABM Treaty is the cornerstone of the modern architecture of international security. We proceed from the premise that there are elements which unite us with our partners in the United States.
I have a better idea. Let's abandon the old ways of gamesmanship, standoffs, and Government shutdowns. Let us keep our priorities straight and start with the things that matter most to our country's security and our country's future. This year, let us have responsible spending from day one and put the national security and education of our children first in line when it comes to the appropriations process.
And finally—[laughter]—and finally, one of the temptations, and perhaps the greatest temptation of all, is what we call appropriations gamesmanship. And here's the way it works. We've got a budget of X amount, and you add up all the potential appropriations bills. The budget amount is X. And so they'll pass one bill of the 13, and they may add a little bit here. Then they'll pass another bill, all still within the budget. And they finally get to the last appropriations bills, and all of a sudden, if the budget amount becomes the appropriated amount, we busted the budget, because of all the previous bills have added a little here or there. And guess what generally is the last ones out? Defense—the defense bill. In other words, they'll put it on the President's desk and say, "You either get to bust the budget, Mr. President, or you have to choose between defense or perhaps education." That's gamesmanship. And that's not necessary, folks. That's not good to play with our national security or our national interests in educating every child.
I am pleased that my administration has assembled an outstanding national security team. I asked Don Rumsfeld to come to Washington because of his creativity and his experience and because I know he is a results-oriented leader who will get the job done. Don and I will work closely with our new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who will serve as my principal military adviser, and who will make sure the military's point of view is always heard in the White House.
And one of the jobs of Dick, should he be confirmed, is to make sure the Congress understands why our force size—why we are asking for monies for certain force sizes and how it relates to keeping the national security of the country in the long term, as well as today.
The President. About 3. But I've had the full day already. I got up at 5:45 a.m., read all the stuff I needed to read, and then took off at about 7 a.m. with a little run, got back to the house about 7:45 a.m., and we had a CIA briefing for an hour and a national security briefing. Both of them took an hour. Then we came down here and started working. And this will be it. Probably finish about 12:15 p.m. or so.
It also makes sense not to be reliant— if you're the Commander in Chief, it makes sense, common sense, not to be heavily reliant upon materials such as steel. If you're worried about the security of the country and you become over-reliant upon foreign sources of steel, it can easily affect the capacity of our military to be well supplied. Steel is an important job issue; it's also an important national security issue. And that is why we took the actions we took in this administration.
And guess which—guess what usually has been saved for the last? The defense bill, leaving our national security at the mercy of budget games and last-minute cuts. This year, we might even see our administration's two highest priorities, education and national defense, being played off against each other.
I want to thank Chip for his fine introduction and for picking me for the award. [Laughter] I see Secretary of the Army White is here. General Jumper is here. I'm sure I'm going to miss somebody. David Chu is here, and other members of one of the finest teams—one of the finest national security teams a President has ever put together. Thank you all for coming. And I appreciate the Reserve chiefs, as well. Thank you for your service to the country.
Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the final great priority of my budget is economic security for the American people. To achieve these great national objectives—to win the war, protect the homeland, and revitalize our economy—our budget will run a deficit that will be small and short term, so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally responsible manner. We have clear priorities, and we must act at home with the same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas. We'll prevail in the war, and we will defeat this recession.
I'll tell you another way to create jobs is to have an energy policy, is to finally get an energy policy that does several things. First of all, if you're trying to create jobs and you're not sure what the price of energy is going to be, it makes job creation less certain. If there's a price spike, it's harder to hire somebody. If there's uncertainty in supply, it's harder to plan for the future. And therefore, having an energy policy makes sense. It makes sense from an economic perspective. We've got to conserve more. We've got to utilize technology more. But for the sake of national security, we must find more oil and gas at home to become less reliant on foreign sources of oil.
And so, my hope is, is that those nations we put on notice and other nations around the world will make the right choice. But they should not make any mistake about it: We will defend our national security. The security of the United States of America is my most important job. And I take it seriously, and I will follow through.
We will confront the hard issues, threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security, before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
We will confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security -- before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
The President. He was doing jumping jacks today. [Laughter] No, he's doing great. He is feeling healthy. I talked to him on the way back from—right after I got on the ground from Chicago last night. He felt great. He told me he'd see me first thing in the morning for our national security briefing, and he was there. He looks good, feels good, and that's good news.
The President. Yes. [Laughter] There needs to be balance when it comes to freedom of information laws. There's some things that when I discuss in the privacy of the Oval Office or national security matters, that just should not be in the national arena. On the other hand, my administration will cooperate fully with freedom of information requests if it doesn't jeopardize national security, for example. The interesting problem I have—or for me, as the President, is what's personal and what's not personal. Frankly, I haven't been on the job long enough to have been—to have had to make those choices.
But we'll cooperate with the press, unless we think it's a matter of national security or something that's entirely private.
Part of our issue is to make sure our electricity grids are open enough to handle additional power, say, in the western part of our State, obviously the western part of Mexico. There is some very good news in our hemisphere, at least as far as Americans are concerned, and that is that because of technologies, the Canadians have developed vast crude oil resources in what appeared heretofore to be crude oil that could not be recovered from the ground in what they call tar pits—tar sands. And therefore, Canada is going to be the largest exporter of crude oil to the United States. That's good for our national security; it's good for our economy.
I think it's very important for our country to realize what Spence talked about, and that is the need to make sure we diversify our energy supplies. It's important to do so for national security reasons, for starters. As I mentioned yesterday in Iowa—we went to a place that was doing research on biomass and value-added processing, and I said to the folks there, I said, "I would much rather have our economy powered by crops grown in Iowa than barrels of oil coming out of Iraq." It's in our Nation's interest that we diversify. It's in our Nation's interest that we become less dependent upon nations, some of which really don't care for what we believe in. And I believe we can do so.
People have got to understand that it's possible that we could find, and likely find, 600,000 barrels of oil a day out of ANWR. That's what we import from Saudi—I mean, from Iraq. It makes sense, folks, for us to have an environmentally sensitive exploration plan in America in order to diversify supply, not only for national security reasons but for international reasons, as well.
I have also reserved the option of trial by military commission for foreign terrorists who wage war against our country. Noncitizens, non-U.S. citizens who plan and/or commit mass murder are more than criminal suspects. They are unlawful combatants who seek to destroy our country and our way of life. And if I determine that it is in the national security interest of our great land to try by military commission those who make war on America, then we will do so. We will act with fairness, and we will deliver justice, which is far more than the terrorists ever grant to their innocent victims.
I am proud of my runningmate. I met with the Vice President this morning at our national security briefing. It—taking a look at him reminded me I didn't pick him because of his hairdo. [Laughter] He does not have the waviest hair in the race. [Laughter] But I picked him because of his experience and sound judgment. He's doing a great job for the American people.
As we think about ways to make sure this economy remains strong today and strong tomorrow, one thing we've got to work on is our energy. I mean, we've got to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy if we want this economy to remain vibrant. High gasoline and heating costs are a tax on the working people, and they're a tax on small businesses, and they drain the budgets of people working hard. They make it expensive for people to run their companies, and they both affect our economic and national security. So our goal is to work for a day in which America is no longer dependent, beginning with less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
THE PRESIDENT: Big time, because I agree with Mr. Friedman, and I agree with Americans who understand being hooked on foreign oil as an economic problem and a national security problem. I couldn't agree more with him. For example, I'm convinced with more research we'll be able to develop additional ways to make ethanol. There is about 4.6 million cars in America now that are flex-fuel cars. They could either use regular gasoline or fuel derived from corn. I'd like, for example, to not only advance that technology of deriving fuel from corn, but also deriving fuel from waste materials, and I'm convinced we could do that with a good push, a technological push. In other words, I want to see different kinds of cars on our road that don't require (sic) upon crude oil from overseas, but we have got a serious problem, and now is the time to fix it, and I'm going to address it again at the State of the Union.
But to be wise—to be competitive in the future, we've got to get off being hooked on Middle Eastern oil. In order for us to grow—[applause]—I said something in the State of the Union that probably surprised some of you. I said, we have a serious problem; we're addicted to oil. But I meant what I said. I fully understand that an economy that requires oil from parts of the world that—where some countries may not like us, puts our economic security at risk and puts our national security at risk. And I'm serious about working with members of both parties to advance technological research that will enable us to drive cars by using switchgrass as a base stock of ethanol—or wood chips, as well as the corn and soybeans we use today. I mean, I can't wait for the day, and I know future Presidents can't wait for the day, when some-body walks in with the farm report, and says, "Mr. President, the crops are up, and we're less dependent on Middle Eastern oil." And it's coming; it's coming.
And so I agree with you. I think it's very important for us to use technology to help protect the environment and, at the same time, achieve an important economic and national security objective, which is no dependence on oil.
I also recognize that in order for us to be competitive, we've got to get off oil. I said in my State of the Union that the United States has a problem—we're addicted to oil. Now, I know you probably thought that was kind of weird for a Texan to say. [Laughter] But I'm telling you, we've got an economic security problem because of our reliance upon fossil fuels, and we've got a national security problem because of our reliance on fossil fuels.
The President. It's nice to be home, for starters. This is my home; this is where I intend to live after I'm the President. It's good to be back with the people who elected me the Governor of Texas. I'm working a lot of issues, national security matters. I've got some decisions to make— as you know, working on immigration policy, state visit with the President of Mexico.
I am pleased that my administration has assembled an outstanding national security team. I asked Don Rumsfeld to come to Washington because of his creativity and his experience and because I know he is a results-oriented leader who will get the job done. Don and I will work closely with our new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who will serve as my principal military adviser, and who will make sure the military's point of view is always heard in the White House.
And one of the jobs of Dick, should he be confirmed, is to make sure the Congress understands why our force size—why we are asking for monies for certain force sizes and how it relates to keeping the national security of the country in the long term, as well as today.
The President. About 3. But I've had the full day already. I got up at 5:45 a.m., read all the stuff I needed to read, and then took off at about 7 a.m. with a little run, got back to the house about 7:45 a.m., and we had a CIA briefing for an hour and a national security briefing. Both of them took an hour. Then we came down here and started working. And this will be it. Probably finish about 12:15 p.m. or so.
I have also reserved the option of trial by military commission for foreign terrorists who wage war against our country. Noncitizens, non-U.S. citizens who plan and/or commit mass murder are more than criminal suspects. They are unlawful combatants who seek to destroy our country and our way of life. And if I determine that it is in the national security interest of our great land to try by military commission those who make war on America, then we will do so. We will act with fairness, and we will deliver justice, which is far more than the terrorists ever grant to their innocent victims.
Now, I want you to remember that we are at war. The United States of America is under attack. And at war, the President needs to have the capacity to protect the national security interests and the safety of the American people. And so I asked, what are all my options as your Commander in Chief? What are the options to protect America? What do I need to know about what might occur to make sure that I can come in front of the folks in Orlando, Florida, and say we're doing everything in our power, or we have every option in our power to keep you safe?
In a court of law, there would be all kinds of questions that might compromise our ability to gather incredibly important intelligence to prevent the next attack from happening to America. It seems like to me that the President of the United States ought to have the option to protect the national security interests of the country and, therefore, protect America from further attack.
The fourth ingredient is to make sure we've got an energy supply as we head into the future. I oftentimes talk about how important it is to have—to be able to grow your own food. Part of the national security of the country is to know that we're self-sufficient when it comes to food production, that we can grow our own food, we don't have to rely upon another nation to feed our people. It's one of the luxuries this Nation has. We don't have the same luxury when it comes to energy. We are too reliant upon foreign sources of crude oil. We've got to do a better job of not only conserving energy, but it seems to make sense to me that when we've got energy on our own hemisphere and in our own States, we ought to explore for it, to make us less reliant.
It's in the national security interests of our country to have an energy policy. And we need to get Congress to act on a good one. It's one that will make us less reliant. It's one that encourages more conservation. And it's one that's good for American workers and American jobs.
I want to thank the Teamsters. Jerry Hood traveled with us today, and I've met with Jimmy Hoffa. He understands that this is more than just national security. We're also talking about people's jobs. This is a chance for people to get to work and to make a living and to put—and to help battle this recession that we face.
So I am—I told Frank—I mean, I can assure you, this is not only important for our national security interests; it's right for America that we pursue this. And obviously you don't need to persuade your—any elected officials here. But if you happen to know somebody else in Congress that seems reluctant, tell them the truth; tell them how it works; tell them how important it is for the country.
The single most important item of unfinished business on Capitol Hill is to create a unified Department of Homeland Security that will vastly improve our ability to protect our coasts and our borders and our communities. The election may be over, but a terrorist threat is still real. The Senate must pass a bill that will strengthen our ability to protect the American people. And they must pass a bill that preserves the authority every President since John Kennedy has had to act in the interest of national security. It's imperative that the Congress send me a bill that I can sign before the 107th Congress ends.
Tonight I also ask you to reform our immigration laws so they reflect our values and benefit our economy. I propose a new temporary-worker program to match willing foreign workers with willing employers when no Americans can be found to fill the job. This reform will be good for our economy because employers will find needed workers in an honest and orderly system. A temporary-worker program will help protect our homeland, allowing Border Patrol and law enforcement to focus on true threats to our national security.
So what I think we need to do is have what I call a temporary-worker program, to issue a card, a temporary-worker card that's legitimate and real, that says, if you're a willing American employer, you can hire a willing foreign employee that has a tem-porary-worker card, so long as there's not an American worker available. In other words, people are doing jobs Americans aren't doing. And they're coming to our country, and they're taking great risk. And we've got a lot of Border Patrol agents trying to chase the good, hard-working people down. If we make the system work right, if we make it legitimate, then our Border Patrol will be able to chase down true threats to our national security. They'll be able to focus on the threats. We won't be putting our employers in a position where they're hoping the documentation that's presented to them is real.
We also got to make sure we have affordable and reliable supplies of energy. If you're a small business in the manufacturing world, and you're wondering whether or not your gas bill is going to be— spikes or you're wondering whether or not—whether you're going to get electricity at all, it makes it awfully hard to plan and to grow. So we need a reasonable energy policy. We need to encourage conservation, of course. We need to work on alternative sources of energy. We need clean coal technology. We need to explore for more natural gas. But one thing is for certain: In order for our economic security and national security, we need to be less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
We need an energy plan. If we want to have jobs here, you know, we've got to have energy. And right now, we're too dependent on foreign sources of energy. That's just the way it is. I submitted an energy plan to the United States Congress over 2 years ago. It was a plan that said we've got to diversify our energy supply, but we've got to be—and we've got to be wise about how we use the energy we have. We need clean coal technology to make sure we can use precious coal. We can explore in environmentally friendly ways. We need alternative sources of energy like ethanol and biodiesel. We need to be better at conservation. We need to promote technologies which change habits and uses, like hydrogen-driven automobiles. But for the sake of economic security and for the sake of national security, I need an energy plan on my desk to make us less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
We put together a vast coalition, nearly 40 countries in Afghanistan and nearly 30 in Iraq. And it's important we work with others in this war on terror because you've got to share intelligence, and you've got to work to cut off money. And when we find a threat, it's important to be able to pick up the phone and call a friend like Great Britain and say, "Pick this person up, please," because—"and here's the evidence." In other words, there's got to be a collaborative effort. And we are. And we're working closely with countries around the world. I'll continue to work on this coalition when I'm your President for 4 more years. But I will never turn over our security—national security decisions to leaders of other countries.
My opponent, the Senator, talks about foreign policy. In our first debate, he proposed America pass a "global test." In order to defend ourselves, we have to get international approval. That's one of the major differences we have about defending our country. I work with allies. I work with friends. We'll continue to build strong coalitions. But I will never turn over our national security decisions to leaders of other countries. We'll be resolute. We'll be strong, and we will wage a comprehensive war against the terrorists.
For the sake of this economy and for the sake of national security, Congress needs to pass an energy plan and get it to my desk as soon as possible so we can become less reliant on foreign sources of energy.
And so one of the initiatives that I will push—again—is to get an energy bill out. I will tell you, with $55 oil we don't need incentives to oil and gas companies to explore. There are plenty of incentives. What we need is to put a strategy in place that will help this country over time become less dependent. It's really important. It's an important part of our economic security, and it's an important part of our national security.
Rich talked about, you know, I didn't realize we spent that much money on protecting it, but we also spend a lot of money on analyzing FOIA, because somebody told me there's 3.5 million FOIA requests a year, which is a lot. I can't tell you the percentage which pass or not pass, but there is an active interest in people reading documents. And I would hope that those who expose documents are wise about the difference between that which truly would jeopardize national security and that which should be read.
For the sake of American workers and families, we have got to reduce our dependence on foreign sources of energy. It's a matter of economic security, and it's also a matter of national security. When America depends on only a handful of countries for nearly 60 percent of our oil, the danger of major energy disruption grows. Some of you are old enough to remember the seventies, when we rationed gasoline. The President of the United States and Congress have a responsibility to make sure America never returns to those days, and we've got to meet that responsibility.
So immigration reform is going to be an interesting subject when we get back to Washington, DC. I'm looking forward to the topic. I also want to talk to you about national security. Make no mistake about it, we are at war. We're at war with an enemy that attacked us on September the 11th, 2001. We're at war against an enemy that, since that day, has continued to kill. They have killed in Madrid and Istanbul and Jakarta and Casablanca and Riyadh and Bali and London and elsewhere.
As veterans of foreign wars, you know that the rise of liberty is critical to our national security. You understand the power of freedom because you've witnessed it with your own eyes. In a single lifetime, many of you have seen liberty spread from Germany and Japan to Eastern Europe to Latin America to Southeast Asia and Africa and beyond. You've seen that democracies do not fight each other and that liberation leads to peace. With your courage and commitment to freedom, you have lifted lives of millions around the globe, and you made this country and our world more secure.
Secondly, it ought to be clear to the American people that we need more gasoline. Do you realize we haven't built a new refinery since the 1970s? For the sake of national security and for the sake of our consumers, this country needs to expand our refining capacity. And we need more terminals for liquified natural gas. I mean, if you're worried about your heating bills— and you should be—one way to deal with it is to increase the supply available for consumers. And Congress must understand that. We need to get rid of needless regulations that hamper our capacity to increase the supply of energy to you all.
Mr. President, our peoples share common outlooks on absolutely fundamental issues, such as the defense of democracy, the spread of freedom, and respect for human rights. We have had dialog on crucial themes for two nations that are committed to the challenges of peace and of globalization. International security, development aid, the balance of trade rules, and the reform of the multilateral system in the United Nations, in particular, have been at the core of our conversations. We have been known how to emphasize our affinities. We are two major, multiethnic democracies, with the vocations for cooperating in promoting full citizenship and fighting all forms of discrimination.
Today, by video, I met with my—I met not only in the room with my national security team, but we had the Ambassador and General Casey from Baghdad. And it's interesting to be able to communicate with your commanders on the ground in real time. And the reason I bring that up is that they are constantly updating the national security team and me about the effectiveness of these troops and how much territory we're turning over to the Iraqi troops.
I'm just getting warmed up. [Laughter] In order to stay competitive, America must end its dependence on oil. When you're hooked on oil from the Middle East, it means you've got an economic security issue and a national security issue. And I spoke last night to some exciting opportunities here in America. I believe—I know that technology is going to enable us to diversify away from being dependent on hydrocarbon, from oil.
In order for us to be competitive and lead in the world, we've got to get off of Middle Eastern oil. I know it shocks some of you to hear a Texan say, "We're addicted to oil." And we are, and it's a problem. It's a problem. It's a national security problem, and it's an economic security problem to be reliant upon oil from parts of the world that may be unstable or parts of the world that simply don't like us. And so the best way to deal with that is to continue to foster new technologies because of research and development that will enable us to use different fuels in our cars, for example.
I also outlined several other steps to keep this economy strong and growing. We need to address our dependence on foreign sources of oil. You might remember, I stood up in front of the country and said, "We have a real problem; we're addicted to oil." I meant what I said. I call upon Congress to join with this administration to pass the Advanced Energy Initiative that will fund research in cleaner, more reliable technologies like hydrogen and ethanol, so we become less dependent. For the sake of our national security and economic security, we must not be dependent on foreign sources of oil.
We're beginning to see the signs of progress. Earlier this month, Iraqi leaders announced they had reached an agreement on the need to address critical issues, such as de-Ba'athification in the operation of security ministries and the distribution of oil revenues, in the spirit of national unity. They agreed to form a new national security council that will improve coordination within the government on these and other difficult issues. This council will include representatives from all major political groups, as well as leaders from Iraq's executive, judicial, and legislative branches. As a result of this council's considered advice, the Iraqi Government that emerges will be more effective and more unified.
Being addicted to oil is a problem for our economy. In a global economy, when burgeoning economies like India and China use more fossil fuels, it affects the price of gasoline here in America. In a world in which sometimes people have got the oil we need, don't like us—kind of a undiplomatic way of putting it—it means we've got a national security issue.
We talked about energy. My view of the energy initiative is that we've got to be wise about the resources we have and be smart about the investment for research and development so we can change our energy habits. The truth of the matter is, we'll all be better off if we use alternative sources of energy like ethanol or explore how to use hybrid batteries in a better way. I mean, there's some really interesting things coming down the pike, and I look forward to not only leading my own nation to spend money to be on the leading edge of technological change when it comes to energy but also sharing those technologies and ideas with our counterparts. Because we want to make sure that we've got national security concerns addressed when it comes to energy; we also want to be good stewards of the environment—and we can do both by the use of proper technologies.
We will confront the hard issues, threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security, before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
We will confront the hard issues -- threats to our national security, threats to our health and retirement security -- before the challenges of our time become crises for our children.
And next week I will also focus on another important issue, our national security. This is the most basic commitment of America's Government and the greatest responsibility of an American President. Our Nation's ideals inspire the world, but our Nation's ships and planes and armies must defend these ideals and sustain our allies and friends.
The President. Which is a national security concern.
In the meantime, we've also got to make sure that we're less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. The lack of an energy policy and national security concerns go hand-in-hand. And I'm very aware of that, sir.
As the Secretary mentioned, I'm focusing this week on America's national security. And few are more important to that mission than the people of the State Department, both Foreign Service and civil service. Our gathering here will be seen by some 10,000 State Department personnel in the Washington area. It will be seen by 37,000 committed men and women, including many Foreign Service national employees in 250 posts all over the world.
Allegations of espionage of an FBI counterintelligence agent are extremely serious and are deeply disturbing, particularly disturbing for the thousands of men and women who work for the FBI, whose mission is to protect our national security and who now must deal with allegations that one of their own may have undermined it.
We've assembled the finest national security team of any administration. We understand our job is to keep the peace. But we also understand in order to do so, our military must be well prepared, well trained, well housed, and well paid.
The President. He was doing jumping jacks today. [Laughter] No, he's doing great. He is feeling healthy. I talked to him on the way back from—right after I got on the ground from Chicago last night. He felt great. He told me he'd see me first thing in the morning for our national security briefing, and he was there. He looks good, feels good, and that's good news.
In retrospect, the world of 1976 looks staid and static compared to the revolutions of change that characterize our times. But what hasn't changed, what isn't different is the fact that sound intelligence is still critically important to America's national security. The challenges are new, but we still need your work to help us meet them. The opportunities are new, but we need your help to take advantage of them. But perhaps most of all, in a world where change, itself, seems to be the only constant, we need your help to anticipate change and to shape it in a way that favors freedom.
The President. Yes. [Laughter] There needs to be balance when it comes to freedom of information laws. There's some things that when I discuss in the privacy of the Oval Office or national security matters, that just should not be in the national arena. On the other hand, my administration will cooperate fully with freedom of information requests if it doesn't jeopardize national security, for example. The interesting problem I have—or for me, as the President, is what's personal and what's not personal. Frankly, I haven't been on the job long enough to have been—to have had to make those choices.
But we'll cooperate with the press, unless we think it's a matter of national security or something that's entirely private.
Reconnaissance flights are a part of a comprehensive national security strategy that helps maintain peace and stability in our world. During the last 11 days, the United States and China have confronted strong emotions, deeply held and often conflicting convictions, and profoundly different points of view. China's decision to prevent the return of our crew for 11 days is inconsistent with the kind of relationship we have both said we wish to have.
Part of our issue is to make sure our electricity grids are open enough to handle additional power, say, in the western part of our State, obviously the western part of Mexico. There is some very good news in our hemisphere, at least as far as Americans are concerned, and that is that because of technologies, the Canadians have developed vast crude oil resources in what appeared heretofore to be crude oil that could not be recovered from the ground in what they call tar pits—tar sands. And therefore, Canada is going to be the largest exporter of crude oil to the United States. That's good for our national security; it's good for our economy.
For almost 100 years, this campus has served as one of our country's premier centers for learning and thinking about America's national security. Some of America's finest soldiers have studied here—Dwight Eisenhower and Colin Powell. Some of America's finest statesmen have taught here—George Kennan.
Today, you're carrying on this proud tradition forward, continuing to train tomorrow's generals, admirals, and other national security thinkers, and continuing to provide the intellectual capital for our Nation's strategic vision.
I am committed to achieving a credible deterrent with the lowest possible number of nuclear weapons consistent with our national security needs, including our obligations to our allies. My goal is to move quickly to reduce nuclear forces. The United States will lead by example to achieve our interests and the interests for peace in the world.
I've been working with my friend Senator Phil Gramm from Texas to reform the Export Administrative Act, to strengthen both national security and our high-tech industry. In March, I'm pleased to report, the Senate Banking Committee passed a revised EAA, which my administration strongly supports. It's now time to pass it for the House, so I can sign it into law.
So the second part of our energy plan will be to expand and diversify our Nation's energy supplies. Diversity is important, not only for energy security but also for national security. Overdependence on any one source of energy, especially a foreign source, leaves us vulnerable to price shocks, supply interruptions, and in the worst case, blackmail. America today imports 52 percent of all our oil. If we don't take action, those imports will only grow. As long as cars and trucks run on gasoline, we will need oil, and we should produce more of it at home.
And I talked about those supplies. And one of the keys to energy security in America, and national security, is to have a diversified energy base. That means oil; that means gas; that means safe nuclear energy; that means clean coal technologies to make sure the abundance of coal that we use is done in a friendly—environmentally friendly way.
But it also means interesting new opportunities such as biomass, and that's why we've come here. I can't think of anything better for national security than to replace barrels of oil that come into the country from nations that can't stand America— some of them don't—with products that we grow here in America. I can't think of— I would much rather replace oil from Iraq with corn products from Iowa, and it's getting within our reach.
I think it's very important for our country to realize what Spence talked about, and that is the need to make sure we diversify our energy supplies. It's important to do so for national security reasons, for starters. As I mentioned yesterday in Iowa—we went to a place that was doing research on biomass and value-added processing, and I said to the folks there, I said, "I would much rather have our economy powered by crops grown in Iowa than barrels of oil coming out of Iraq." It's in our Nation's interest that we diversify. It's in our Nation's interest that we become less dependent upon nations, some of which really don't care for what we believe in. And I believe we can do so.
People have got to understand that it's possible that we could find, and likely find, 600,000 barrels of oil a day out of ANWR. That's what we import from Saudi—I mean, from Iraq. It makes sense, folks, for us to have an environmentally sensitive exploration plan in America in order to diversify supply, not only for national security reasons but for international reasons, as well.
When we open trade, we open minds. We trade with China because trade is good policy for our economy, because trade is good policy for democracy, and because trade is good policy for our national security.
The President. The Vice President is feeling great. I had a meeting with him. At Camp David, I was asked whether or not he would be at work on Monday. I said I was confident he would be there at 8 o'clock sharp, during our national security briefing, and there he was. He looks great. His spirits are high. He sets such a good example for Americans who may share the same condition he has, and that is to listen to your body, to take precautionary measures, and to be active. And he's active, and he's—we were all thrilled to see how good he looked this morning.
President Bush. I have a national security briefing. I'm going to speak to Mr. Putin this morning. Part of it's just to kind of continue our general conversation on world affairs. I've got a few specific things I want to talk to him about; he probably has some things on his mind.
I want to thank Jennifer Edwards, as well, for being here. I want to thank all the officers for coming. I want to thank again the Members of Congress for being here to discuss with all of us how we make sure American agriculture thrives as we head into the 21st century. I mean, after all, we're talking about national security. It's important for our Nation to be able to grow foodstuffs to feed our people. Can you imagine a country that was unable to grow enough food to feed the people? It would be a nation that would be subject to international pressure. It would be a nation at risk. And so when we're talking about American agriculture, we're really talking about a national security issue.
The President. It's nice to be home, for starters. This is my home; this is where I intend to live after I'm the President. It's good to be back with the people who elected me the Governor of Texas. I'm working a lot of issues, national security matters. I've got some decisions to make— as you know, working on immigration policy, state visit with the President of Mexico.
The President. I've got a lot of national security concerns that we're working on— Iraq, Macedonia, very worrisome right now. Kind of a blowup last night, and yesterday it looked like we had a peaceful resolution. It's now in doubt. Urge all—we're urging all the parties to get back to the table and renounce the violence. The Secretary of Defense and I are working on some projects. There will be some announcements.
I'm worried about the fact that the ag economy suffers, because agriculture is a part of our national security mix. If we can't grow enough food to feed our people, we've got a problem. It will complicate our foreign policy, needless to say. Well, we've got to make sure our ag economy stays strong and healthy, and this supplemental is a way to help do that.
I have a better idea. Let's abandon the old ways of gamesmanship, standoffs, and Government shutdowns. Let us keep our priorities straight and start with the things that matter most to our country's security and our country's future. This year, let us have responsible spending from day one and put the national security and education of our children first in line when it comes to the appropriations process.
And finally—[laughter]—and finally, one of the temptations, and perhaps the greatest temptation of all, is what we call appropriations gamesmanship. And here's the way it works. We've got a budget of X amount, and you add up all the potential appropriations bills. The budget amount is X. And so they'll pass one bill of the 13, and they may add a little bit here. Then they'll pass another bill, all still within the budget. And they finally get to the last appropriations bills, and all of a sudden, if the budget amount becomes the appropriated amount, we busted the budget, because of all the previous bills have added a little here or there. And guess what generally is the last ones out? Defense—the defense bill. In other words, they'll put it on the President's desk and say, "You either get to bust the budget, Mr. President, or you have to choose between defense or perhaps education." That's gamesmanship. And that's not necessary, folks. That's not good to play with our national security or our national interests in educating every child.
I am pleased that my administration has assembled an outstanding national security team. I asked Don Rumsfeld to come to Washington because of his creativity and his experience and because I know he is a results-oriented leader who will get the job done. Don and I will work closely with our new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who will serve as my principal military adviser, and who will make sure the military's point of view is always heard in the White House.
And one of the jobs of Dick, should he be confirmed, is to make sure the Congress understands why our force size—why we are asking for monies for certain force sizes and how it relates to keeping the national security of the country in the long term, as well as today.
The President. About 3. But I've had the full day already. I got up at 5:45 a.m., read all the stuff I needed to read, and then took off at about 7 a.m. with a little run, got back to the house about 7:45 a.m., and we had a CIA briefing for an hour and a national security briefing. Both of them took an hour. Then we came down here and started working. And this will be it. Probably finish about 12:15 p.m. or so.
It also makes sense not to be reliant— if you're the Commander in Chief, it makes sense, common sense, not to be heavily reliant upon materials such as steel. If you're worried about the security of the country and you become over-reliant upon foreign sources of steel, it can easily affect the capacity of our military to be well supplied. Steel is an important job issue; it's also an important national security issue. And that is why we took the actions we took in this administration.
And guess which—guess what usually has been saved for the last? The defense bill, leaving our national security at the mercy of budget games and last-minute cuts. This year, we might even see our administration's two highest priorities, education and national defense, being played off against each other.
I've been in regular contact with the Vice President, the Secretary of Defense, the national security team, and my Cabinet. We have taken all appropriate security precautions to protect the American people. Our military at home and around the world is on high-alert status, and we have taken the necessary security precautions to continue the functions of your Government.
I have just completed a meeting with our national security team, and we have received the latest intelligence updates.
This morning I am sending to Congress a request for emergency funding authority so that we are prepared to spend whatever it takes to rescue victims, to help the citizens of New York City and Washington, DC, respond to this tragedy, and to protect our national security.
I was airborne on Air Force One and put our—on September the 11th—and put our troops to a high-alert status. And one of the first phone calls I got through my national security office was from Vladimir Putin, announcing that he has stood his troops down—which is significant. In the old days, if we'd have put our troops on heightened alert, they would have put their troops on more heightened alert—[laughter]—which would have caused our troops to go on higher alert. And all of a sudden we would have had a conflict, a potential conflict out of the realm of the incident that caused the troops to go on alert.
But there are two other aspects to a good, strong economic stimulus package, one of which is trade promotion authority. And the other is an energy bill. Now, there was a good energy bill passed out of the House of Representatives. And the reason it passed is because members of both parties understand an energy bill is not only good for jobs, it's important for our national security to have a good energy policy.
And I ask Congress to now act on an energy bill that the House of Representatives passed back in August. This is an issue of special importance to California. Too much of our energy comes from the Middle East. The plan I sent up to Congress promotes conservation, expands energy supplies, and improves the efficiency of our energy network. Our country needs greater energy independence. This issue is a matter of national security, and I hope the Senate acts quickly.
The President. I say it's the absolute right thing to do. And it is—to set up the option to use a military tribunal in the time of war makes a lot of sense. We're fighting a war, Terry, against the most evil kinds of people. And I need to have that extraordinary option at my fingertips. I ought to be able to have that option available should we ever bring one of these Al Qaida members in alive. It's our national interests; it's our national security interests we have a military tribunal available. It is in the interests of the safety of potential jurors that we have a military tribunal.
The President. Not the least bit concerned. I made the right decision. A President must have the option of using a military tribunal in times of war. I look forward to explaining to my friend the President of Spain why I made that decision. It makes eminent sense to have the military tribunal option available. It makes sense for national security purposes. It makes sense for the protection of potential jurors. It makes sense for homeland security. It is the right decision to make, and I will explain that to any leader who asks.
The success of agriculture contributes to the strength of this Nation. It is in our national interests, in our national security interests that we have a strong farm economy. And the farmers of America contribute to the values of our Nation and to the generosity of our Nation. As we speak, trucks and planes are delivering American food to the hungry in Afghanistan. Those rations say, "A gift from the people of the United States." This gift is made possible by the farmers in our country, and I want to thank you for it.
Since the beginning of my administration, I have strongly supported ethanol and biofuels. And the energy plan I sent to Congress back in the spring supports biofuels. The House passed an energy plan. Now it's time for the Senate to act and pass an energy plan. It's in our national security interests to do so. I look forward to signing a national energy bill.
I have also reserved the option of trial by military commission for foreign terrorists who wage war against our country. Noncitizens, non-U.S. citizens who plan and/or commit mass murder are more than criminal suspects. They are unlawful combatants who seek to destroy our country and our way of life. And if I determine that it is in the national security interest of our great land to try by military commission those who make war on America, then we will do so. We will act with fairness, and we will deliver justice, which is far more than the terrorists ever grant to their innocent victims.
Now, I want you to remember that we are at war. The United States of America is under attack. And at war, the President needs to have the capacity to protect the national security interests and the safety of the American people. And so I asked, what are all my options as your Commander in Chief? What are the options to protect America? What do I need to know about what might occur to make sure that I can come in front of the folks in Orlando, Florida, and say we're doing everything in our power, or we have every option in our power to keep you safe?
In a court of law, there would be all kinds of questions that might compromise our ability to gather incredibly important intelligence to prevent the next attack from happening to America. It seems like to me that the President of the United States ought to have the option to protect the national security interests of the country and, therefore, protect America from further attack.
But we're under attack. Every morning I wake up and read the threat assessments. The evil ones still intend to harm America. And if it's in our national security interests, to bring people to justice, I will use a military tribunal. And I may give you one example of why I would use one. We haven't used one yet; it's simply an option. If we capture an Al Qaida representative—if we capture a murderer, and in order to convict that murderer it would require us giving means of how we knew he was guilty that would jeopardize the security of the United States, he'll be tried in a military tribunal.
In other words, this is an ongoing conflict. There are still real threats. And I, in order to get a conviction of a murderer, will not jeopardize the people of the United States. I will not show our secrets. I will not tip our hand. I will not let the world at large, particularly our enemy, understand how we put a case together if it's going to jeopardize and compromise national security secrets of the United States of America.
I hope you'll let Congress hear from you. Let them know you want action not just on national security or homeland security; you want action to protect America's economic security, as well.
The President. You know, one thing at a time, Ron. I do have the option of military tribunals, because I think it's going to be a way to protect national security matters. But I'll make that judgment when we bring him to justice.
At home, we've created a new Office of Homeland Security, under my friend Tom Ridge, and worked with Congress to provide more than $20 billion to safeguard our territory. New airline security legislation has been signed into law. Our law enforcement agencies are protecting our safety, while respecting the constitutional rights of our citizens. We listed the 22 most wanted foreign terrorists. We're reorganizing the INS so it can more effectively prevent the entry into the United States by those who want to threaten our national security.
But Tommy has just come back from the Afghan theater. He gave me a full briefing on what he saw and what he heard. We just got off of a teleconference with the national security team, to discuss his trip and to discuss what's taking place in Afghanistan.
The President. One of the things that we discussed today in the national security conference, and I discussed yesterday with members of my national security team, was the India and Pakistan issue. Colin Powell has spoke to both sides today, urging restraint, urging calm. I was pleased to—I'm pleased to note that President Musharraf has announced the arrest of 50 extreme terrorists—extremists or terrorists. And I hope India takes note of that, that the President is responding forcefully and actively to bring those who would harm others to justice.
We've also got to have an energy policy if we're going to grow for the long term. One of the great things about America is, is that we're self-sufficient in food. It's a national security interest to be self-sufficient in food. It's a luxury that you've always taken for granted here in this country, but imagine if we have to rely upon somebody else to provide us food. It would be a problem. The good news is, we can not only grow food for ourselves; we can grow food for others.
The fourth ingredient is to make sure we've got an energy supply as we head into the future. I oftentimes talk about how important it is to have—to be able to grow your own food. Part of the national security of the country is to know that we're self-sufficient when it comes to food production, that we can grow our own food, we don't have to rely upon another nation to feed our people. It's one of the luxuries this Nation has. We don't have the same luxury when it comes to energy. We are too reliant upon foreign sources of crude oil. We've got to do a better job of not only conserving energy, but it seems to make sense to me that when we've got energy on our own hemisphere and in our own States, we ought to explore for it, to make us less reliant.
It's in the national security interests of our country to have an energy policy. And we need to get Congress to act on a good one. It's one that will make us less reliant. It's one that encourages more conservation. And it's one that's good for American workers and American jobs.
Thank you all. Let me just be to the point: A good energy plan is important for our national security, and it's important for job security. Around the table, I'm honored to be sitting with people who represent thousands of working people. And they ask the same question I ask: What can the Federal Government do to help people find work? What can we do to create jobs?
That's the question these two leaders ask all the time, "How best can I help the members of my union find work? What can I do to make them, you know, be able to feed their families?" It's the same question I ask. And that's why we're linked up on this issue. We've got Republicans sitting around this table; we've got Democrats sitting around this table; we've probably got some people who don't care about politics sitting around the table. But all of us know that the energy bill that's now stuck in the Senate, that can't get voted on in the Senate, will be good for America. It will be good for our foreign policy, good for our national security, and more importantly, it will be good for jobs.
And he reminded me, one reason he was so strong for the energy plan was not only because it was good for U.S. security—he cares about U.S. security just like I care about U.S. security—but because when we explore for energy in America, it means jobs for working people. This is just as much of a job program as it is an energy— as a national security program, folks. And it's about time Congress skips all the politics and focuses on what's right for the American people.
The national security is more important than political party. And I appreciate the way Democrats and Republicans have worked together. Energy is more important than political party. Jobs are more important than political party. And we showed what's possible in Washington on the education bill. We passed a good piece of legislation that says, public education is a cornerstone of job security; it's a cornerstone of hope; and the Federal Government is going to take an active role in promoting accountability to make sure nobody gets left behind in America.
The next opportunity is to make sure that this Nation has an energy policy. This Nation needs an energy policy. Jobs depend on affordable energy. If there's a price spike or a disruption in supply, people may not have work. And it's also in our Nation's national security interests that we become less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
Listen, finding oil and gas and coal in our own hemisphere—and nuclear power, for that matter—in our own hemisphere is in our national security interest. And I ask the Senate to put aside all the politics and get me a good energy bill. It's in the best interests for people trying to find work, and it's in the best interests of the United States of America.
We can create more opportunities by selling more products overseas. You know, I spent a lot of time as the Governor of Texas with the farmers. The agricultural sector is an incredibly important part of our economy. And one of the benefits we have as a nation is, we can feed ourselves. That's good for the national security interest, by the way. But we produce more food than we need. We ought to be selling it overseas. The more markets available for U.S. products, the more likely it is somebody is going to find work.
We can do some smart things in Washington to create jobs. One of the things the Government needs to do is to spend money on research and development. The more research and development there are, the more likely it is we'll find interesting answers to energy problems or health problems or national security issues. And that translates into jobs.
I want to thank Chip for his fine introduction and for picking me for the award. [Laughter] I see Secretary of the Army White is here. General Jumper is here. I'm sure I'm going to miss somebody. David Chu is here, and other members of one of the finest teams—one of the finest national security teams a President has ever put together. Thank you all for coming. And I appreciate the Reserve chiefs, as well. Thank you for your service to the country.
The President. I have—the question is about the detainees in Guantanamo Bay. I had a very interesting meeting this morning with my national security team. We're discussing all the legal ramifications of how we—what we—how we characterize the actions at Guantanamo Bay. A couple of things we agree on: One, they will not be treated as prisoners of war; they're illegal combatants. Secondly, they will be treated humanely. And then, I'll figure out—I'll listen to all the legalisms and announce my decision when I make it. But we're in total agreement on how to—on whether or not—on how these prisoners, or detainees, excuse me, ought to be treated. And they'll be treated well.
Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the final great priority of my budget is economic security for the American people. To achieve these great national objectives—to win the war, protect the homeland, and revitalize our economy—our budget will run a deficit that will be small and short term, so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally responsible manner. We have clear priorities, and we must act at home with the same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas. We'll prevail in the war, and we will defeat this recession.
I'll tell you another way to create jobs is to have an energy policy, is to finally get an energy policy that does several things. First of all, if you're trying to create jobs and you're not sure what the price of energy is going to be, it makes job creation less certain. If there's a price spike, it's harder to hire somebody. If there's uncertainty in supply, it's harder to plan for the future. And therefore, having an energy policy makes sense. It makes sense from an economic perspective. We've got to conserve more. We've got to utilize technology more. But for the sake of national security, we must find more oil and gas at home to become less reliant on foreign sources of oil.
And let me remind you something else about jobs. In order to make sure people can find work and the job base of America expands, folks, we need an energy policy. We need a policy that has reliable energy for America. Imagine an employer wondering whether or not they're going to run out of energy. That person is not likely to hire somebody. Or if we get tight on energy, the price of energy goes up—it means somebody is not going to be able to find work. We need an energy policy. We need to encourage conservation. We need to build infrastructure, and we need to encourage exploration amongst—in the United States. A good energy policy is job security. But a good energy policy that reduces dependency upon foreign oil is a matter of national security as well.
And so, my hope is, is that those nations we put on notice and other nations around the world will make the right choice. But they should not make any mistake about it: We will defend our national security. The security of the United States of America is my most important job. And I take it seriously, and I will follow through.
I appreciate being with people who love the land and appreciate open space. I realize there's nobody more central to the American experience than the cowboy. But cattle raising is not only a big part of America's past; I view it as an incredibly important part of America's future. This Nation has got to eat. [Laughter] It's in our national security interests that we be able to feed ourselves. Thank goodness we don't have to rely on somebody else's meat to make sure our people are healthy and well fed.
I understand he's proposed an energy plan. That makes a lot of sense. The State of Wisconsin has an energy plan; the United States of America needs an energy plan, an energy plan that encourages conservation, but an energy plan as well that understands, if we rely upon foreign sources of crude, we could have problems in the future. We need a plan that not only saves energy but finds more energy to become less dependent on foreign nations. It is in our national security interests to do so. And that includes alternative fuels, like ethanol. [Applause] We've got some corn boys here. [Laughter] Behave yourselves back there. [Laughter]
I want to thank the Teamsters. Jerry Hood traveled with us today, and I've met with Jimmy Hoffa. He understands that this is more than just national security. We're also talking about people's jobs. This is a chance for people to get to work and to make a living and to put—and to help battle this recession that we face.
So I am—I told Frank—I mean, I can assure you, this is not only important for our national security interests; it's right for America that we pursue this. And obviously you don't need to persuade your—any elected officials here. But if you happen to know somebody else in Congress that seems reluctant, tell them the truth; tell them how it works; tell them how important it is for the country.
And a lot of people understand that not only is it in our national security interests that we drill for oil and gas in Alaska, it's good for jobs; it's good for working people; it's good for people to be able to put money on the plate—money on the table so they can feed their families. Listen, we need to be exploring for oil and gas in ANWR.
On my way to visit Asia, I stopped in Alaska, a place of tremendous natural beauty and important energy resources. I met with many Alaskans, including native leaders, who want to preserve the grandeur of their State while carefully developing the energy beneath a small fraction of it. New technology makes this possible; our national security makes it urgent. Alaskans know firsthand that modern technology allows us to bring oil to the surface cleanly and safely, while protecting our environment and wildlife. We should listen to Alaskans who support exploring ANWR in a safe and clean way.
Thank you all for coming today. I'm honored to be joined by Secretary of Energy Spence Abraham and Administrator Christie Todd Whitman of the Environmental Protection Agency. We're here to discuss an energy plan, a comprehensive energy plan that recognizes that through technology, we can increase our national security and economic security by reducing demand for petrochemicals, and at the same time, we can clean up the air in our country. I want to thank these two leaders for having a practical vision as to how to achieve common objectives.
This is dependence on foreign oil. And this dependence is a challenge to our economic security, because dependence can lead to price shocks and fuel shortages. And this dependence on foreign oil is a matter of national security. To put it bluntly, sometimes we rely upon energy sources from countries that don't particularly like us.
Another reason I feel confident in our ability to accomplish some important missions for the country is, I've assembled a great team. For those of you who have ever run a company or run an organization, you understand what I'm about to say— that you're only as good as your team. And my national security team is strong and capable and experienced, and so is my domestic policy team, with Tommy Thompson playing an integral role. And Tommy, I want to thank you for serving the country, and thank you for being a part of my Cabinet.
Before I talk about retirement security, I see people wearing our uniform—the uniform—and I've got to talk about national security from a defense perspective. I submitted a budget to the United States Congress that sets this priority: We will defend freedom at any cost. The budget I submitted says basically this: If you wear the uniform of the United States of America and you're fighting to defend our freedom, you deserve the best equipment, the best training, another pay raise. And Congress best heed that call.
And also, we need an energy bill. Listen, we import over 50 percent of our energy from overseas. And that doesn't make sense. We have to do it because we're not conserving enough, nor we are producing enough. For the good of the national security of our country, we ought to encourage more exploration in an environmentally friendly way on American soil. We ought to be less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil.
I also want to thank Elaine Chao. You know, one of the ways you judge a President is what kind of team does he put together. And as you've seen, I've put together a fabulous national security team, a team of experienced hands and people who are willing to express their opinion, willing to work for what's best for America. And I've also put together a great domestic team as well. And one of those members is Elaine Chao, who is the Secretary of Labor, and I want to thank you for coming, Elaine.
And there are some things we can do to create jobs, besides providing tax incentives. One, we can have an energy plan that makes sense. I came to Minnesota to lay out my vision for an energy plan that says: We can conserve better; we must modernize our electricity; but for the sake of our national security, we need to develop more oil and gas here at home. The less dependent we are on foreign sources of crude oil, the more secure America will be in the long run.
I also want to talk about energy. Energy is incredibly vital for our economic vitality. And you've got to understand, as the President, somebody who's concerned about our national security as well, the fact that we import over 50 percent of our energy from around the world is an indication that we're not as strong from a national security perspective as we could be or should be. And so we need to have an energy plan, one that, on the one hand, encourages conservation and the modernization of our infrastructure, electricity infrastructure, but we've also got to explore for more energy. And we can do so in an environmentally friendly way, starting in Alaska, where there's a lot of oil and gas.
I want you to know that Mexico imports gas from the United States. In other words—and it's a hemispheric issue, and we've got to think long-term on behalf of the American citizens. And so I put out a comprehensive energy plan. It passed the House of Representatives. It needs to get out of the Senate and get to my desk, for the good of the national security of the country as well as for the good for jobs.
I also appreciate the members of the Florida congressional delegation for flying down today. We had really a good talk about issues that matter to our national security as well as issues that matter to Florida. Congressmen Bilirakis, Davis, Miller, Putnam, and the chairman, Congressman Bill Young, thank you all for coming.
History is going to show as well, we had a substantial legislative session in the House. As you know, as a result of the Speaker's leadership, we took a giant stride for improving our energy situation here in America. On the one hand, we encouraged more conservation and the development and modernization of our infrastructure, but on the other hand, we understand we've got to find more oil and gas in an environmentally friendly way here in America. The energy bill that passed the House was a really good piece of legislation. It is in our national security that we become less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil, and Denny Hastert understood that.
Nothing is more important than the national security of our country—nothing is more important—so nothing is more important than our defense budget. I've heard some of them talking about, you know, "It's too big," up there. Let me just make this as clear as I can make it: The price for freedom is high, but it's never too high, as far as I'm concerned.
He also understands that this Nation needs an energy policy—an energy policy on the one hand that encourages conservation, that uses our technologies to make sure we remain productive but consume less, but on the other hand, that we better find sources of energy at home in order to make us less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. It is in our national security interests that we have a balanced energy policy. And my, do we need his vote in the United States right now when it comes to making sure we have a balanced energy policy.
And therefore, I have submitted to the United States Congress a budget which makes our national security the number one priority. I've asked for the largest defense increase—spending on defense since 20 years ago. And I expect Congress to pass this budget, because they've got to understand, if we're putting our young soldiers in harm's way, they deserve the best equipment, the best training, the best pay possible. The price of freedom is high, but as far as I'm concerned, it is never too high.
Not only am I concerned about economic security; I'm also concerned about our national security. And I want to share some thoughts with you about my thinking about our national security.
The President. Well, the tribunals are just an option for us. And we'll be using the tribunals if in the course of bringing somebody to justice it may jeopardize or compromise national security interests. So they're a tool; they're an option. As you know, we're discussing rules about how they can function well. The Defense Department asked a lot of opinions from respected scholars, and the world's now beginning to see what we meant by a fair system that will enable us to bring people to justice but at the same time protect national security. I have no plans right now to use anybody—nobody in mind yet. But the option is available.
The President. I told you, if any evidence that is required to convict them jeopardizes the national security interests of the country, we'll use the tribunal.
I want to be very open, and I apologize to my friend President Bush now. We are not fighting against drug trafficking in order to satisfy the United States or Europe. Drug trafficking, in partnership with terrorism, is an issue of national security. It's an issue of national security. On Wednesday they killed 9 people, 9 of our brothers and sisters, and there are 30 people wounded. I have publicly stated, and I want to repeat this: We are not going to let this stand.
And, footnote here, it's also true that the statistics indicate that although levels are still low, there is an increase in the consumption of cocaine among youth in Peru. And that is also part of our concern, with regard to national security.
But I want you all to understand something Lindsey understands and I darn sure know, is that we now import over 50 percent of our energy from overseas. Sometimes we get it from nations that aren't really pleased with U.S. foreign policy. For the good of national security, we need to explore, in environmentally friendly ways, for energy in our own country so we can reduce dependency. It's in our national security interests that we do so.
We need somebody like John, who is going to take a tough position, tough stand on issues like energy. I don't need to be telling my friends in Texas that we've got an energy problem, but we do. We need to do a better job of conservation, no question about it. And we will. As technology advances, we will conserve more. But for the sake of our national security, we need to be finding more energy at home. We need to be less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. John Cornyn will be a steady vote and a steady voice when it comes to good, sound energy policy in Washington, DC.
We've got a lot of work to do in Washington, DC, and I appreciate these House Members' support. But there's no greater work to be done than to protect the American people. I have submitted a budget that prioritizes homeland defense and our national security. I submitted a budget that recognizes that we've got to prepare America for whatever emergency may come, a budget that puts ample amount of money in place to enable our first-responders, our brave police and firefighters and EMS crews all around the country, to have the equipment and training necessary to respond should the enemy hit us again.
First, in order for the long-term job security of our country, this country needs to have an energy plan. We need to have a plan, because if there is a disruption in supply, it's going to affect jobs. You've got to understand, we import more than 50 percent of our energy from countries around the world. And I'll be perfectly blunt with you: Some of them don't like America. Some of the people sending our energy our way really don't care for us that much. And for the good of our national security and economic security, we need an energy plan.
So there's a bill—one of them came out of the House, and there's one on the floor of the Senate—would not only promote ethanol, not only promote conservation and encourage the development of technologies that will change our lives in positive ways, but it will also encourage exploration here at home. We need that bill. It's good for economic security for those who work in America, and it's important for our national security as well.
But I want you to know that in the meantime, for the sake of economic security and for the sake of national security, we need to be finding more energy at home. We import more than 50 percent of our energy from around the world. And some of those countries from which we import, they don't like America. And I don't like to be in a position of having to rely upon energy from countries that don't like us.
All of these elements are a part of an energy bill that Greg helped get out of the House, that is stalled in the United States Senate. I repeat: For the sake of economic security of those who work for a living and for the sake of national security, we need Senators in Washington, DC, who will promote and work for sound energy policy. It's good for the country.
I'm sure you've read about the budget priorities that I—the budget I submitted, with its priorities. And by far the biggest priority is a increase in the spending for our national security and the defense budget. And I want to explain why.
The President. There is a energy bill with ANWR passed by the House, an energy bill without ANWR passed by the Senate— soon to be energy bill without ANWR passed by the Senate. And we'll see what happens. I do think it is very important for the American people to understand we need more supply to offset the national security risk of importing oil from parts of the world that do not like America. And I am confident we can find more supply in an environmentally friendly way.
And I appreciate John Thune working on the bio-energy rebate program, to make sure that we help increase, on the one hand, the demand for ethanol and, on the other hand, the supply of ethanol. It's good public policy for America. It's good for our air; it's good for our economy; and it's good for our national security.
And we need a good farm bill out of Congress. We don't need any more politics with the farm bill. Let's get a farm bill on my desk that makes sense for the South Dakota farmers. Farming is an incredibly important part of this national economy of ours. It's important to understand that good farm policy is not only good for the economy; it's good for out national security as well. Thank goodness we can feed our people in America.
And what's bad for our national security is that we are too dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. We're too dependent on sources of energy from some countries that don't particularly care for America. And one way to help reduce that dependency is to promote, encourage value-added processing with America products such as ethanol.
I told the people—I told the people when I was running, I was for ethanol. And a lot of people said, "Well, he's from Texas. He's not for ethanol." Listen, I'm the President of everybody, and I understand what it means to be reliant upon somebody else's energy. There's plenty of room for ethanol in the energy mix in America. We must have it. We must have it for the good of our farm economy; we must have it for the good of our air; and we must have it for the national security reasons of the United States of America.
I appreciate Bill's understanding about the importance of energy for the State of California. It's hard to believe that our Nation has had no comprehensive energy plan for a long time. And as a result, the people of this State began to suffer. And so in Washington, we put together a plan that says, on the one hand, we've got to do a better job of conserving our scarce resources. And at the same time, we've got to use our vast technological know-how to develop renewable sources of energy. But it also says that for the sake of our economic security and for the sake of our national security, we must become less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil.
But we also recognize that it is important for us to find more energy in America, that we ought to produce more. We have a national security problem. Over 50 percent of our energy comes from other countries, and some of those countries don't like us. Some of them aren't our friends. And so for the sake of our national security and for the sake of our economic security, we need an energy bill. One passed the House, and I want to thank Heather for her leadership. One has passed the Senate, and I appreciate Pete for his leadership. And now it's time for Congress to act and get a bill to my desk which I can sign.
I mentioned national security, and that's on my mind these days. Every morning when I'm there in Washington, I walk into the beautiful Oval Office and read a threat assessment prepared by our intelligence agencies, and it's in a list of what we're learning and what we think and what we know about an enemy that still wants to hit America. So every day I'm reminded that my biggest task and most important job is to protect the homeland.
We've also got a strategy here at home to deal with bioterrorism. And that's a real threat to America, but we must be prepared if such a threat were to come. We've got an initiative to make sure that our borders are more secure. We've got to do a better job at the INS of understanding who is coming into our country, why they're coming into our country, and how long they intend to stay in our country. And if they're going to be here for a short period of time, are they actually leaving our country? For the sake of our national security, we've got to reform the INS and bring it up to speed and make it a modern agency with the capacity to gather and disperse information in a modern way.
I appreciate Bill's commonsense view of energy. This Nation needs an energy policy. We haven't had an energy policy for a long period of time. Finally, they got one bill passed out of the House, and they've got one coming out of the Senate. Now they need to get together and get the bill to my desk. And here's what it basically says. It says, we can use technology to develop renewable sources of energy, which we will. It says, we must do a better job of conserving energy, which we must. But it also says, in an environmentally friendly way, we can find more energy in our country. And that's important. It's important not only for the economic security of people looking for work; it is important for the national security of the United States of America. We import over 50 percent of our oil from overseas, and a lot of those countries don't particularly care for us. And you need to have a Governor who's got a vision about energy, if you expect this State to grow and if people want to find work.
I am so honored by our hard work of our Secretary of State and my national security team—by the way, one of whom is doing great, named Condoleezza Rice, came right out of this part of the world. Thank goodness she's there and not at Stanford. [Laughter] Nothing wrong with Stanford, but America is better off with her leading our National Security Council.
Milton has shown us how freedom can enhance our national security. He is the intellectual godfather of our all-volunteer army. He argued that America could rely on the dedication of soldiers who serve in armed forces of their own free will, and he was right. We have recently seen the quality and idealism and skill of the all-volunteer army. Those who serve our country by choice are serving it with honor.
And I firmly believe that we need to spend what it takes to protect our freedoms, and we're going to do that. We need to make sure our military has got the best equipment, the best training, the best pay possible to win this war. And it's going to take a while to win the war. This isn't a war that's going to end tomorrow. It's a war that is going to require a steady, patient, united country going after people who still want to harm America. It's going to require money to make sure our national security, homeland security is intact.
There's a lot of thought up here in Washington about national defense, as there should be. After all, we are at war. And one of my concerns and one of the Senator's concerns is the fact that our Nation relies upon too much energy from nations that sometimes don't like us, that we're dependent on foreign sources of energy. And we don't necessarily have to be that dependent, because we've got vast reserves in the great State of Alaska. And for the good of our national security and for the good of our economic security, we must develop those reserves in an environmentally friendly way, and this man understands that.
George Voinovich has been a leader in Congress, as have the other members from the congressional delegation, about joining me and the Vice President to make sure this Nation finally wakes up and has a balanced energy policy. You know, we import over 50 percent of our energy, and sometimes the people we import from don't like us. [Laughter] For the sake of economic security and for the sake of national security, this Nation needs a comprehensive energy plan that encourages conservation, promotes new technologies that will save energy and enhance renewable sources of energy, but at the same time, a energy plan that has the wisdom to promote clean coal technology, so that we're less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
You know, what's interesting about Washington, it's a town—unfortunately, it's the kind of place where second-guessing has become second-nature. The American people know this about me and my national security team and my administration: Had I known that the enemy was going to use airplanes to kill on that fateful morning, I would have done everything in my power to protect the American people. We will use the might of America to protect the American people.
And I'm proud of the team I put together as well. I've got a great national security team, headed by Colin Powell and by Condi Rice and Andy Card. And I'm honored they're traveling with me, and I'm honored you have a chance to meet them as well.
For decades, we voluntarily, on our own, created walls and barriers around ourselves and decided to live alone within these walls. And in a time when high technology is absolutely mandatory to the beneficial development of any country, this circumstance today is just unforgivable. And today, in the realms of national security, international security, economics, trade, we now are beginning to blend in together with the world economy at large.
Before I do though, I do want to say that I am working hard to secure the country. My vision is for a country that is not only more secure but also a country that is better. And so we're going to talk about the "better" part, how best to help people. I picked—the first way to start is to pick a good Cabinet. I've really done that. I'm surrounded by great people on not only the foreign policy side, on the national security side of my administration, but also on the domestic side.
In order to make sure this economy is strong, we've got to make sure that the agricultural sector of our economy is strong. See, I understand that. I was from a— the Governor of the second largest agricultural State in the Union. I understand farm economics. I understand the need to have a hopeful economy. And I understand the need to be able to grow more—to grow more food than we need, for the national security of the country as well.
We're also working to reform the Export Administration Act, known as the EAA. We've got a bill out of the Senate; we're working to get a bill out of the House. And I want you all to understand—you've probably been told this already, but I want to tell you what else we've done. We've raised the control limits for computer systems, and I'm eliminating outmoded controls on computer chips. The idea is to understand the difference between national security and free trade. And I think we've brought some common sense to this issue.
The nay-sayers and the skeptics, you know, challenge that policy. They don't understand the technologies now available that allow us to provide domestic energy and at the same time protect our environment. But let me put it to you this way: For the sake of economic security, we need a sound energy policy. And for the sake of national security, we must become less reliant on foreign sources of energy. Some of those sources don't particularly care about America, I might add.
I appreciate so very much the work on an energy bill. Listen, this country needs an energy bill. We need to do a better job of conserving, no question about it. We need to enhance renewables. But we need to reduce supply from countries that don't like us. It is not in our national security to be importing oil from countries around the world.
I want to talk about the challenges America faces. I worry about our security. I'm worried about our homeland security. I'm worried about our national security, and I'm worried about economic security. And that's what I want to talk to you about.
We talked about an energy bill. He supported the energy bill. I support the energy bill for two reasons: One, it will help jobs; the more infrastructure we build in America, the more jobs there will be. Two, I don't particularly care for the fact that we get a lot of our energy from overseas. Over 50 percent of our energy comes from overseas, and some of the suppliers aren't real friendly to America. For the good of economic security and for the good of national security, we need a sound energy policy here in America.
The President. No, I haven't spoken to Chairman Karzai yet. I spoke to him yesterday, interestingly enough, to express our condolences about the loss of life during the military action. He was talked to by a member of my national security team.
The President. At this moment, around 60,000 Americans are deployed around the world in the war against terror. We've given great responsibilities to them and to you. And those of us in Washington have great responsibilities of our own. We must never cut corners when it comes to our national security. We owe our military every weapon you need, every dollar it takes to fight and to win this war.
