You're going to hear Mark talk about what the Federal Government is trying to do to make sure that you understand this information is available. There's other ways to—you can log on, if you happen to be a high-tech person, and use the Internet. You can go to www.medicare.gov. It's not all that hard, and there will be all kinds of information available to you.
And the most important thing is, for people who are having drug costs that are causing them trouble right now or they're struggling with their costs, is to find out about this program. As you said, Mr. President, there's some easy ways to do that. You can call us at 1-800-MEDICARE, any time, day or night. You can go to the web site, www.medicare.gov.
You can help by making a call to your mother or father and tell them what's available. You can help by showing an older neighbor how to fill out a form. You can help by spending an afternoon at the local retirement home. And by the way, when you help somebody, you're really helping yourself. You can get information 24 hours a day calling 1-800-MEDICARE. It's pretty easy to remember, 1-800-MEDICARE. Or you can use the Internet to visit the official Medicare web site at medicare.gov. All you've got to do is type in medicare.gov, and you're going to find out what I'm talking about.
The President. So in other words, we've had a mailing out—and by the way, if you've got a mom or a dad who may have misplaced their mailing or you didn't get your mailing, there's an easy way to make sure that the information that is coming out of Washington to help you gets to you, and that is to call 1-800-MEDICARE and ask for the application form. If you're a caregiver and you want to get on the Internet, medicare.gov will enable you to get these forms, get the information to the people. In other words, just because somebody got rid of the mailing—didn't open the mail right or lost the mailing, doesn't mean you shouldn't get the mailing. It's worthwhile, believe me. This information is important information to improving somebody's life.
The President. And therefore, Mark's job is to make sure that people like Dorothy have got the answers to the questions. And if not, 1-800-MEDICARE or medicare.gov will have the answers.
Low-income seniors—about a third of our seniors will be eligible for a drug benefit that includes little or no premium, low deductibles, and no gaps in coverage. On the average, Medicare will pay over 95 percent of the prescription drug cost for these low-income beneficiaries. It's a good deal. This isn't—we're not here to promote a political party. We're here to promote a good deal for our seniors. And I urge you, if you're a son or a daughter, find out what I'm talking about and talk to your mom or dad or talk to your grandparents. If you want to be involved through your church or through a community organization, find out about what we're talking about. And it's not hard. We've got all kinds of—1-800-MEDICARE. That's not that hard to figure out how to call that—1-800-MEDICARE or medicare.gov on the Internet. But find out what we're talking about. Verify, and then go out and help a senior make a right decision, the decision best for them.
The President. Right, and there's the timetable I talked about; there's the phone number I talked about—1-800-MEDICARE; medicare.gov.
There's 780,000 folks on Medicare here in Arizona, and one of the reasons I have come is, hopefully, to get a message out to as many of the 780,000 that I can. And by the way, we're leaving behind a lot of folks who are going to help get out the message here in Arizona as well. If you got any questions, there's an easy way to figure out what I'm talking about here. It's called 1-800-MEDICARE. Pick up the phone; there will be somebody there to answer your question. Isn't that right, Mark? Yes. [Laughter] We don't want one of these "check's in the mail" deal, you know—or medicare.gov.
The reason I'm telling you this—and I'm going to say it again before I'm through talking—is that it's really important, for example, for sons and daughters to look into what's available for their mothers and dads, and one way to do it is to get on 1-800-MEDICARE or medicare.gov.
The President. Now, wait a minute. [Laughter] If I had said California, he'd have got things done too. [Laughter] I'm just telling you, he can get it done. That's why he's sitting where he's sitting. He's a Ph.D. Here you got on stage a C student and a Ph.D., and look who's President. He's also an M.D. But he's also responsible for making sure that information gets out. By the way, if you're interested in information, call 1-800-MEDICARE, or medicare.gov.
The President. Yes. There's a great opportunity for those of you out there who want to help a senior citizen in your neighborhood, is to help. Get on the Internet, medicare.gov. Look it up. Find out what we're talking about. Make sure what we're talking about is exactly what the Government has got available. I think it is. I think you're going to find out what we're—what Mark and I are telling you is exactly what's going to happen. But it's a fantastic opportunity.
And you can find out on medicare.gov, or you can call 1-800-MEDICARE. If you get a form, fill it out. When they send you a form to determine whether or not you're going to be eligible for this enhanced drug benefit from the Federal Government, fill it out. It doesn't do any harm to fill it out, and if you need help, somebody will help you fill it out.
If you have Medicare, I urge you to take advantage of this opportunity to learn more. Review your choices and make the decision that is right for you. If you have family or friends on Medicare, you can help too. Helping can be as simple as showing an older neighbor how to fill out a form or making a call for your mom or dad. You can get information 24 hours a day by calling 1-800-MEDICARE or by visiting the official Medicare web site at medicare.gov.
The Federal Government has a responsibility to the elderly and the poor when it comes to health care. That's a commitment our Government made. My attitude is, if you're going to provide health care for the elderly, it ought to be good health care. That's why we had the most substantive reforms of Medicare since Lyndon Baines Johnson was the President, since the program was formed. The Medicare plan that is now available for our seniors includes prescription drug coverage and a wide variety of choices for our seniors to choose from. And it's going to become available this January, and if you've got a mother and father on Medicare, I strongly urge you to look on the Internet for medicare.gov, and take a look and explain to your mother or father the options available. It's a good deal. It makes sense to have a modern, reformed Medicare system for our seniors.
And what we want to assure seniors around the country is that there is help. You can call 1-800-MEDICARE. You can get on the Internet with medicare.gov. Ask your son or daughter; ask people in your church; ask people in AARP; ask people in your community center to help you look at what's available for you. It's a good deal. It's a good deal for our seniors.
Despite early challenges, the results so far are clear: The new Medicare prescription drug plan is a good deal for seniors. If you're a Medicare recipient and have not yet signed up for prescription drug coverage, I encourage you to review your options and choose the plan that is right for you. Americans who have parents on Medicare should encourage and help them to sign up. Citizen groups, faith-based organizations, health professionals, and pharmacies across America are working to help answer questions. Seniors can also get information 24 hours a day by calling 1-800-MEDICARE or by visiting the official Medicare web site at medicare.gov.
If you happen to have a mother or father or a neighbor who's a senior, I strongly urge you to get your loved one or your friend to call 1-800-MEDICARE or to go on the web at medicare.gov and help that person realize the great new options available to him or her.
Part of my mission here, as I said earlier, was to convince people to find out about the program. If you haven't looked at the new prescription drug benefit, do so. Call 1-800-MEDICARE, or go to medicare.gov on the Internet. We're beginning to see some surveys from people who are actually using the program, and what's interesting is a lot of the seniors are getting information from the Internet. There's—and you'll see it's user-friendly. It's been designed to make it easy for the senior to take advantage of this new program.
People are finding that they can save typically 50 percent on their prescriptions—or more—compared to not having coverage. And Consumer Reports pointed out recently that if you're willing to look at generic drugs, or other drugs that work in a very similar way to the ones you're taking now, you can save 70 or 80 percent. And if you call 1-800-MEDICARE, go to medicare.gov, or go to one of the many events happening all over the country, including right here in Canandaigua, there are places to go to get face-to-face help right here to find out about what this means for you. You can save literally thousands of dollars on your drug costs, and you can be protected for the rest of your life against high prescription drug costs in the future.
The President. That's good. If you're a church or community-based group or a synagogue, talk to your folks who go to your facility and encourage them to contact 1-800-MEDICARE, medicare.gov, Susan. I mean, there's all kinds of people like Susan.
The President. My call is, please help. I really hope a son or a daughter takes time on behalf of their mother or father and get on the Internet, medicare.gov, and take a look. You ought to do it. I think it happens to be a duty. If your mother or father is not that interested in getting on the Internet, get on with them. Walk through the steps and take a look at what's available.
The President. Okay. If it's true, you ought to look at it. Senior citizens not only here in upstate New York but all across the country ought to look at this plan, ought to look at the opportunities. If you like it, sign up. It's a good deal. If you need help, ask for help. If you want to find out more about it, call 1-800-MEDICARE or get on the Internet, medicare.gov.
Every senior is saving money, and that's what people have got to know. There is an easy way to find out how the program works, and that's to call 1-800-MEDICARE, or you can go on the computer systems at medicare.gov. Here we're seeing some of our fellow citizens reaching out to seniors to explain the program. And this is happening all across the country. I want to thank those who are here for helping our fellow citizens understand what's available. I fully recognize that when you have a variety of choices from which to choose, it can be a little confusing at first. In other words, people get on the computer and say, "Look at all these different options."
We've got up until May 15th for folks to get the best benefits. If you haven't signed up—if you're listening on TV and haven't signed up, please take a look, call 1-800-MEDICARE or go to medicare.gov if you want to find out what's available.
Dr. McClellan. Well, now over 29 million people are already participating, hundreds of thousands more seniors and people with a disability are signing up every week. But we want to make sure, Mr. President, that everybody gets the support they need to make a competent decision. Some of the things that we do in that include our Medicare help line. People can call us anytime, day or night, at 1-800-MEDICARE, and get personalized help, finding out about what the drug benefit means for you. If you like to go online, or you've got a son or daughter or grandchildren who do, you can go to medicare.gov and get personalized help as well.
And how do you do it? You can get on the computer, medicare.gov, and look and see whether or not your mom or dad ought to sign up for a program. I'm just telling you what's happening so far. People are saving a lot of money when it comes to their prescription drugs.
We want to make sure people know about this important new benefit, and if they have questions, there are lots of places to go to get the personal information they need to make a good decision and start saving. That includes the medicare.gov web site, which many of the sons and daughters of our beneficiaries are using, as well as the beneficiaries themselves. It includes our 1-800-MEDICARE, 24/7 customer service line, which has around 7,000 trained representatives now and can provide help in multiple languages for people who call in.
The President. Yes, this is a good deal. And it's really worth people looking at. I'm going to repeat: If you're a son or a daughter and your mother or dad is eligible for Medicare, you need to help your parent. You really do. You need to get on the phone or get on the computer, medicare.gov, or 1-800-MEDICARE.
Listen, I couldn't stand the thought of seniors having to choose between an electricity bill and pharmaceuticals. That didn't make any sense in our country. And if you're a low-income senior listening today, you ought to make sure you get ahold of a representative from Medicare or a friend or a churchmate, or call 1-800-MEDICARE, or get your son or daughter to get on medicare.gov and find out the benefits inherent in this program. If you're one-third of the seniors who are income-qualified, the Federal Government is going to pay 95 percent or more of your prescription drug benefits.
There are many ways you can get help to choose a drug plan and enroll. You can ask your doctor or pharmacist for help. You can speak with a Medicare counselor 24 hours a day at 1-800-MEDICARE. You can enroll online by visiting the official Medicare web site at medicare.gov. If you need help enrolling, citizens' groups like AARP and NAACP, faith-based organizations, health professionals, and pharmacies are working to answer questions. Between now and May 15th, events will be held across the country to answer your questions and help you enroll for the new drug coverage. And if you have family or friends on Medicare, you can help too. Helping can be as simple as showing an older neighbor how to fill out a form, helping a senior use the Internet, or making a call for your mom or dad.
And so over the next week, Secretary Leavitt and myself and others in the administration are reminding people that there's a good opportunity for you. And so I would suggest, if you haven't signed up yet, if you're living in Florida and watching this TV program—or anywhere in the country watching the TV program, I'd call 1-800-MEDICARE, and there's somebody there who'll help you. Or if you've got some— if you're computer-literate or have a friend who's computer-literate, get on the web page, medicare.gov, and take a look—take a look at what's available.
Now, we're reaching out to people from all walks of life. First of all, if you're interested in finding out about the program, call 1-800-MEDICARE, and somebody will be there at the other end of the line explaining it to you. If you're computer-literate, call up medicare.gov, and you'll find a program that will help you—it will help explain to you what is available for you.
There's 780,000 folks on Medicare here in Arizona, and one of the reasons I have come is, hopefully, to get a message out to as many of the 780,000 that I can. And by the way, we're leaving behind a lot of folks who are going to help get out the message here in Arizona as well. If you got any questions, there's an easy way to figure out what I'm talking about here. It's called 1-800-MEDICARE. Pick up the phone; there will be somebody there to answer your question. Isn't that right, Mark? Yes. [Laughter] We don't want one of these "check's in the mail" deal, you know—or medicare.gov.
The reason I'm telling you this—and I'm going to say it again before I'm through talking—is that it's really important, for example, for sons and daughters to look into what's available for their mothers and dads, and one way to do it is to get on 1-800-MEDICARE or medicare.gov.
